0 . 




\ ^ P C 

^ ^ o 

❖ / 


or 

CO 


SRINAGAR 

L I B R A^ Y 


<<^ 

<n 


Class No, 


Q Book No. 


Accession No. 


1^' 

1 Ucc, 





m 



LIBRARY- 


Cld'^S 




Bo.>k 


X3Aja 


Accesnon So 





Accession No. 







'. I / M s' / ^ rv . 

THE ADVENTURES 


OF % 

HUCKLEBERRY FINN 


(TOM sawyer:s comrade) 




BY 


MARK TWAIN 


(SAMUEL L. CLEMENS) 




A NEW IMPRESSION 


WITH ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FOUR ILLUSTRATIONS 


LONDON 

CHATTO &> WINDUS 

1910 





V o 


^ SRINAGAR 

CO L I B R A« Y 


Class No._ 

Book No._ -- 
Accession No. 




NOTICE. 



PsasoKR attempting to find a motive in this Darrntive will be prosecutea; 
persons attempting to find a moral in it will be banished; persons attempt¬ 
ing to find a plot in it will be shot. 


B7 OBDBB OF TEE AUTEOB 

TBB Q. 0.. OEIBF OF ORDKANOB 






EXPLANATORY. 


In this book a number of dialects are used, to wit: the 
Missouri negro dialect; the extremest form of the backwoods 
South-Western dialect; the ordinary “ Pike-County ” dialect; 
and four modified varieties of this last. The shadings have not 
been done in a hap-hazard fashion, or by guess-work; but 
pains-takingly, and with the trustworthy guidance and support 
of personal familianty with these several forms of speech. 

I make this explanation for the reason that without it many 
readers would suppose that all these characters were trying to 
talk alike and not succeeding. 


THE AUTHOB. 


31 . 



CONTENTS 


CHA.PTER 1. 

OiTilisin^ Huck—Moses and the “ Bulrushers "—Miss Watson—Tom 
Sawyer Watts. 


CHAPTER n. 

The Boys Escape Jim—Jim 1—Tom Sawyer’s Gang—Deep-laid Plans 

CHAPTER III. 

A Good Going-over—Grace Triumphant—Pliying Robbers — The 
Genies—“ One of Tom Sawyer’s Lie# ” . . • » . 

CHAPTER IV. 

“ Slow but Sure ”—^Huck and the Judge—Superstition • • . 


CHAPTER V. 

Hack's Father-—The Fond Parent—Befonn 


CHAPTER VI. 

He Went for Judge Thatcher—Huck Decides to lioave- 
Over—-Political Economy—Thrashing Around . 





VAO* 

1 


8 


17 


24 


SO 




X 


CON TENTS. 


CHAPTER VII. 

Laving for Him--Locked in the Cahin—Preparing to Start—Sinking 
the Body—Projecting a Plan—Resting. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Sleeping in the Woods—Ivaising the Dead—On the Watch !—Explor¬ 
ing the Island—A Profitlea Sleep—Finding Jim—Jim's Escape 
—Signs—" Dat one-laigged Nigger”—Balum . . . . 


CHAPTER IX. 

The Cave—The Floating House—A Good Haul .... 

CHAPTER X. 

The Find—Old Hank Bunker—Ir Disguise . . . , , 

CHAPTER XI. 

Huck and the Woman—The Search—Prevarication—Going to Goshen 
—“ They’re after Ue! ”. 


CHAPTER XII. 

Slow Navigation—Borrowing Things—Boarding the Wreck—The 
Plottera—“It ain't Good Morals”—Hunting for the Boat . 


CHAPTER Xni. 

Escaping from ihe Wrei;k—The Watchman—Siuking—A Dead Sleep 


CHAPTER XIV. 

A General Good Time—The Ilarem—French 


PAQB 

47 


67 


73 


80 


87 


98 


109 


. 118 



CONTENTS. 


chapter XV. 

Buck Lose* the Raf^-In the Fog-Aeleep on the Raft-Huck Finds 
the Raft—Trash. 


CHAPTER XVI. 

Expectation-" Good olo Cairo ”-A White Lie-Floating Currency- 
Running by Cairo—Swimming Ashore. 


CHAPTER XVII. 

An Evening Call—The Farm in Arkaneaw— Interior Decorations— 
Stephen Dowling Bots—Poetical Effusions—A Tin Pan Piano . 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

Ool. Qrangerford—Aristocracy—Feuds—^The Testament “A\Bter- 
Moccarinsl”—^Recovering the Raft—The Wood Pile—Pork and 
Cabbage—“ Is dat you, Honey ? ” . 


CHAPTER XIX, 

Tying Up Day-times—An Astronomical Theory—“ Dogs a-Comiug ” 
—^Running a Temperance Revival—The Duke of Bridgewater 
The Troubles of Royalty. 

C HAP TER XX. 

$ 

Buck Expluns—Laying Out a Campaign —Working the Camp-meeting 
—Sly Courting—A Pirate at the Camp-meeting—The Duke as a 
Printer—Jim Wanted. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

SwoidExacise—^Hamlet's Soliloquy—^They Loafed Around Town—A 
Laxy Town—Old Boggs—Death of Boggs. 


si 


PAOB 

126 


134 


147 


160 


177 


100 


20s 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER XXII. 


Sberbura—Attending tbe Circue—Intoxication in the Ring—The 
Thrilling Tragedy 


PAOB 

218 


CHAPTER XXIII. 

Sold—Royal Comparisona—Jim Gets Home-sick • , * , 236 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

Jim in Royal Robes—They Take a Passenger—Getting Information_ 

Family Grief.236 


CHAPTER XXV. 

IB It Them P—Singing the « Doxolojer "—We can Spare it—Awful 

Square—Funeral Orgies—A Bad Investment .... 246 


CHAPTER XXVI. 

A Pious King—The King’s Clergy—She Asked his Pardon—Hiding 

in the Room—fluck Takes the Money.257 


CHAPTER XXVn. 


The Funeral—The Undertaker—Satisfying Curiosity—Suspicious of 

iluck—Quick Sales and Small Prohts 


270 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 

The Trip to England—“The Brute 1 "—Royal Nonesuch—Mary Jane 
Decides to Leave—Huck Parting with Mary Jane—Mumps—The 
Opposition Line. 





IL L US TRA TIONS. 


PAOB 


Huckleberry Finn . FrontUp'uee 
rhe Widow’s .... 
Learcing about Moses and the 
“ Bulrusbers ” 

Miss Watson 
Hock Stealing Away 
They Tip-toed Along . 

Jim 1 . . . . 

Tom Sawyer’s Band of Robbers 
Huck Creeps into bU Window 
Miss Watson's Lecture . 

The Robbers Dispersed 
Rubbing the Lamp. 

1 i M I . 

Judge Thatcher Surprised 
Jim Listening 
“Pap” .... 

Huck and bis Father . 
Reforming the Druokard 
Falling from Grace 
Getting out of the Way . 

Solid Comfort 
Thlnkmg it Over . . 

Raising a Howl . 

“Git Op” 

The Shanty. . , 

Shooting the Pig . 

Taking a Best . 

In the Woods . 

Watching the Boat 
Kscovering the Camp Fire 
Jim and the Ghost 
Misto Bradisb’s Ni^er . 
Exploring the Cave 
In the Cave . 

Jim Sees a Dead Man. 

They Found Eight Dollars 
Jim and the Snake 
Old Hank Banter . 


1 

3 

4 
6 
8 

11 

12 

16 

17 

20 

22 

24 

26 

28 

30 

32 

36 

36 

37 
31» 
41 
44 
47 
4t* 
51 
64 
67 
69 
62 
66 
71 
73 

76 

77 
80 
82 
83 


« A Fair Fit" 

‘‘Come In” 

” Him and another Man " 
She t’ot.-^ up a Snack 
Hump Yourself” 

On the Raft 


P4nr 

. 85 
. . 87 
. 91 
. . 94 
. 97 
. 98 


lie Sometimes Lifted a Chicken 
“ Please Don't, Bill ” 

‘‘ It. ain't Good Morals ” 

“ Oh t Lordy, Lordy 1 ” . 

In a Fix , . . ■ 

‘‘ Hello, What’s Up 7 ” . 

The Wreck . 

We Turned in and Slept. . 
Turning over the Truck 
.Solomon and his Million Wives 
The Story of “ Sollermun ” 

•• \Va Wftiild Sell the llaft . 


101 

105 

107 

108 
109 
112 
116 
116 
118 
120 
121 
125 


Among the Snags . .-128 

Asleep on the Raft . . .129 

“ It Amounted to Something 
being a Raftsman" . . . 134 

“ Boy, that's a Lie ” • .139 

“ Here I is, Huck " . • • .141 

Climbing up the Bank . .145 

‘‘Who’s There 7" . • . . 147 

•‘ Buck ”.150 

“ It Made her Look Spidery " . 166 

“ They Got him out and Emptied 

him ”.157 

Tlie House.159 

Col. Grangerford . . . • 160 

Young Harney Shepherdson . 163 
Miss Charlotte . . . . 166 

” And asked me if I Liked her " . 168 
“ Behind the Wood Pile ” . . 173 
Hiding Day-times . _ . . 177 

“And Dogs a-Coming " . . . 181 

“ By Rights I am a Duke I " . 184 






m 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


PAOB 

“ I am the Late Dauphin " . . 187 

Tail Piece.189 

On the Raft.190 

The King as Juliet . . . 195 

“Courting on the Sly " . . 197 

“ A Pirate for Thirty Years” . 199 
Another Little Job . . . 201 

Practising . . . . 204 

Hamlet’s Soliloquy . I . . 206 

'* Gimme a Chaw ” . . 210 

A Little Monthly Drunlr. . . 213 

The Deatii of Boggs . . . 215 

Sherburn Steps Out . .218 

A Dead Head .... 221 
He Shed Seventeen Suits . . 223 

Tragedy.226 

Their Pockets Bulged . . 228 

Henry the Eighth in Boston Har¬ 
bour .231 

Harmless.235 

Adolphus.238 

He Fairly Emptied that Young 

Fellow.240 

“Alas I our Poor Brother ” . . 243 

“You Bet it is” . , . . 245 


Leaking.217 

Making op the “ Deffisit" . . 250 
Going for Him .... 252 

The Doctor.266 

The Bag of Money . . . 256 

The Cubby.267 

Supper with the Hare-Up . . 259 

" Honest Injun ” . . . 262 

The Duke Looks under the Bed . 265 
Huck Takes the Money . . . 268 

A Crack in the Dining-room Door 270 
The Undertaker . . . . 273 

“ He had a Rat I” . . . 274 

"Was you m my Room 7 " . . 277 

Jawing.279 

In Trouble.281 

Indignation .... 283 
How to Find Them. . . 286 

He Wrote .... 288 

Banner with the Mumps . . 25i0 

riie Auction .... 293 

The True Brothers . . . . 296 

The Doctor Leads Huck . . 298 

The Duke Wrote . . . . 301 

"Gentlemen—Gentlemen I " . 304 

“Jim Lot Out" . . 308 


raok 

The King Shakes Huck . . 309 

The Duke went for Him . . 313 
Spanish Moss . . . 314 

“ Who Nailed Him ? ” . . 317 

Thinking.320 

He gave him Ten Cents . . 324 

Striking for the Back Country . 326 

Still and Sunday-like . . .328 

She Hugged him Tight . 331 

“ Who do you Reckon’t is . " . 336 

“ It was Tom Sawyer’’ . . . 337 

“Mr. Archibald Nichols, I Pre¬ 
sume 7” .341 

A Pretty Long Blessing . 344 

Travelling by Rail . . 346 

Vittles .... .347 

A .Simple Job , . .360 

Witches .... .364 

Getting Wood , . .366 

One of the Best Authorities . . 369 
The Breakfast-Horn . . . 362 

Smooching the Knives . . . 365 

Going Down the Lightning-Rod. 367 
Stealing Spoons . . . . 370 

Tom Advises a Witch Pie . . 373 

The Rubbage-Pile . . . . 375 

“ Missus, dey’s a Sheet Gone " . 378 

“ Id a Tearing Way” , . . 381 

One of his Ancestors . . . 383 

Jim’s Coat of Arms . . 385 

A Tough Job . .389 

Buttons on their Tails . . . 391 

Irrigation . ... 393 

Hel ping off Dull Times . . .396 

Sawdust Diet .... 398 
Trouble is Brewing . . . 401 

Piabing. 403 

Every One had a Gun . . . 406 

T-*m Cauglit on a Splinter . . 408 

Jim Advises a Doctor . . 411 

The Doctor. . . 413 

Uncle Silas in Danger . . 416 

Old Mrs. Hotchkiss . . 417 

Aunt Sally Talks to Hack . . 421 
Tom Sawyer Wounded . . 423 

The Doctor Speaks for Jim . . 426 
Tom Rose Square up in Bed . 430 
" Hand out tliem Letters ” . . 433 

Out of Bondage .... 435 
Tom’s Liberality , 436 

Yours Truly .433 





CHAPTER I.

gj^^JU' don’t know about me, with- 

out you have read a book by 
the name of “ The Adven¬ 
tures of Tom Sawyer,” but 
that ain’t no matter. That 
book was made by Mr. Mark 
Twain, and he told the 
truth, mainly. There wae 
things which he stretched, 
but mainly he told the 
truth. That is nothing. I 
never seen anybody but 
lied, one time or another, 
without it was Aunt Polly, 
or the widow, or maybe 
Mary. Aunt Polly—Tom’s 
Aunt Polly, she is—and 
Mary, and the Widow Dou- 
is told about in that book—which is mostly a true 
book; with some stretchers, as I said before. 

f winds up, is this: Tom and me 

onn t e money that the robbers hid in the cave, and it made 


THE WIDOW’a 



2 


THE AEVENTUIiES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIKN. 


as rich. We got six thousand dollars apiece—all gold. It 
was an awful sight of money when it was piled up. Well, 
Judge Thatcher, he took it and put it out at interest, and it 
fetched us a dollar a day apiece, all the year round—more 
than a body could tell what to do with. The Widow Douglas, 
she took me for her son, and allowed she would sivilise me; 
but it was rough living in the house all the time, considering 
how dismal regular and decent the widow was in all her ways ; 
and so when I couldn't stand it no longer, I lit out. 1 got 
into my bid rags and my sugar-hogshead again, and was free 
and satisfied. But Tom Sawyer he hunted me up and said he 
was going to start a band of robbers, and I might join if I would 
go back to the widow and be respectable. So I went back. 

The widow she cried over me, and called me a poor lost 
lamb, and she called me a lot of other names, too, but she never 
meant no harm by it. '^h*' put tne in them new clothes again, 
and 1 couliln’t do nothing but sweat and sweat, and feel all 
cramj)ed uj). Well, then, the old thing commenced again. 
The widow rung a bell for supper, and you had to come to time. 
When you got to the tiible you couldn’t go right to eating, but 
you had to wait for the widow to tuck down her head and 
grumble a little over the victuals, though there wam’t really 
anything the matter with them. That is, nothing only every¬ 
thing was cooked by itself. In a barrel of odds and ends it is 
different; things get mixed up, and the iuice kind of swajjs 
around, and the things go better. 

After supper she got out her book and learned me about 
Moses and the “ Bulrushersand I was in a sweat to find out 
all about him ; hut by-and-by she let it out that Moses had been 
dead a considenible long time; so then I didn’t care no more 
about him; because I don’t take no stock in dead people. 

Pretty soon I wanted to smoke, and asked the widow to let 
me. Hut she wouldn’t. She said it was a mean practice and 



MOSES AND TTIE BULRUSIlEESr 8 

wasn’t clean, and I must try to not do it any more. That is 
just the way with some people. They get down on a thing 
when they don’t know nothing about it. Here she was a 
bothering about Moses, which was no kin to her, and no use to 
anybody, being gone, you see, yet finding a power of fault with 



LBARNIKG ABOUT MOSES AND THE BULRUSHEES,^ 


me for doing a thing that had some good in it. And she took 

snuff too; of course that was all right, because she done it 
herself. 

Her sister, ^liss Watson, a tolerable slim old maid, with 
giggles on, had just come to live with her, and took a set at 
me now, mth a spelling book. She worked me middling hard 



i 


THE ADVEXTUEES OF llUCKLEIiERRY FINX. 


for about an hour, and then the widow made her ease up. 1 
couldn’t stood it much longer. Then for an hour it was deadly 
dull, and I was fidgety. Miss Watson would say, “Don’t put 
your feet up there, Huckleberry;” and “ don’t scrunch up like 
that, Huckleberry—set up straight;” and pretty soon she 



would say, “ Don’t gap and stretch like that, Huckleberry— 
why don’t you try to behave ? ” Then she told me all about 
the bad place, and I said I wished I was there. She got mad, 
then, but I didn’t mean no harm. All I wanted was to go 
somewheres; all I wanted was a change, I warn’t particular. 
She said it was wicked to say what I said; said she wouldn’t 



MISS WATSON. 


6 


Bay it for the whole world; she was going to live so as to go to 
the good place. Well, I couldn’t see no advantage in going 
where she was going, so I made up my mind I wouldn’t try for 
it. But I never said so, because it would only make trouble, 
and wouldn’t do no good. 

Now she had got a start, and she went on and told me all 
about the good place. She said all a body would have to do 
there was to go around all day long with a harp and sing for ever 
and ever. So I didn’t think much of it. But I never said so. 

I asked her if she reckoned Tom Sawyer would go there, and 
she said, not by a considerable sight. I was glad about that, 
because I wanted him and me to be together. 

Miss Watson she kept pecking at me, and it got tiresome 
and lonesome. By-and*by they fetched the niggers in and 
had prayers, and then everybody was off to bed. I went up to 
my room with a piece of candle and put it on the table. Then 
I set down in a chair by the window and tried to think of some¬ 
thing cheerful, but it wam’t no use. I felt so lonesome I most 
wished I was dead, ^e^stara,was shining, and the leaves 
rustled in the woods ever so mournful; and I heard an owl, 
away off, who-whooing about somebody that was dead, and a 
whippowill and a dog crying about somebody that was going to 
die; and the wind was trying to whisper something to me and 
1 couldn’t make out what it was, and so it made the cold shivers 
run over me. Then away out in the woods I heard that kind 
of a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell about 
something that’s on its mind and can’t make itself understood, 
and 80 can t rest easy in its grave and has to go about that way 
every night grieving. I got so downhearted and scared, I did 
wish I had some company. Pretty soon a spider went crawling 
up my shoulder, and I flipped it off and it lit in the candle; 
and before I could budge it was all shrivelled up. I didn’t need 
anybody to tell me that that was an awful bad sign and would 



e 


THE ADVENTURES OF IIUCKLERETIRY FINN. 


fetch me some bad luck, so I was scared and most shook the 
clothes off of me. I got up and turned around in my tracks 
three times and crossed my breast every time ; and then I tied 
'op a little lock of my hair with a thread to keep witches away. 
But I hadn’t no confidence. You do that when you’ve lost a 



BUCK STEALING AWAT. 


horse-shoe that you’ve found, instead of nailing it up over the 
door, but I hadn’t ever heard anybody say it was any way to 
keep off bad luck when you’d killed a spider. 

I set dowa again, a-shaking all over, and got out my pipe 
for a smoke ; for the house was all as still as death, now, and 
80 the widow wouldn’t know. Well, after a long time I heard 



TOM SAW TER WAITS. 


i 


the eloolc away ofiF in the town go boom—boom—boom—twelve 
licks—and all still again—stiller than ever. Pretty soon I 
heard a twig snap, down in the dark amongst the trees—some¬ 
thing was a-stirring. I set still and listened. Directly I could 
just barely hear a “ me-yow ! me-yow! ” down there. That 
was good! Says I, “me-t/ow;/” as soft as I could, 
and then I put out the light and scrambled out of the window 
on to the shed. Then I slipped down to the ground and crawled 
in amongst the trees, and sure enough there was Tom Sawyei 
waiting for me. 


CHAPTER II.
i 


V 


We 






,/h 








mi 










//.W :M!'’-r' 

mum 


mm 


ff'-fi- 

iyM 


'. I'Jt 






fiwfm 


i»:" 


THEY TIP-TOED ALONG. 


went tii)-toeing along 
a path amongst the 
trees back towards the 
end of the widow’s 
garden, stooping down 
so as the branches 
wouldn’t scrape our 
heads. Wh en we 'was' 
passing by the kitchen 
I fell over a root and 
made a noise. We 
scrouched down and 
laid still. Wiss Wat¬ 
son’s big nigger, named 
Jim, was setting in the 
kitchen door; we could 
see him pretty clear, 
because there was a 
light behind him. He 
got up and stretched 
his neck out about a 
minute,listening. Then 
he says: 

“ Who dah ? ” 

He h'stened some 



TSE BOYS ESCAPE JIM. 


0 


moie; then he come tip-toeing down and stood right between 
us; we could a touched him, nearly. Well, likely it was 
minutes and minutes that there wam’t a sound, and we all 
there so close together. There was a place on my ankle that 
got to itching; but I dasn’t scratch it; and then my ear begun 
to itch f and next my back, right between my shoulders. 
Seemed like Yd die if I couldn’t scratch. Well, I’ve noticed 
that thing plenty of times since. If you are with the quality, 
or at a funeral, or trying to go to sleep when you ain’t sleepy— 
if you are anywheres where it won’t do for you to scratch, why 
you will itch all over in upwards of a thousand jdaces. Pretty 
soon Jim says: 

a 

“Say—who is lyou? "^Tiar is you? Dog my cats ef I 
didn’ hear sumf’n. Well, I knows what I’s gwyne t o do. I’s 
gwyne to set down here and listen tell I hears it agin.” 

So he set down on the ground betwixt me and Tom. He 
leaned his back up against a tree, and stretched his legs out 
till one or|EEem post touched one of mine. My nose begun to 
itch. It itched till the tears come into my eyes. Bat I dasn’t 
scratch. Then it begun to itch on the inside. Next I got to 
itching underneath. I didn’t know how I was going to set 
still. This miserableness went on as much as six or seven 
minutes; but it seemed a sight longer than that, I was itch¬ 
ing in eleven different places now. I reckoned I couldn’t stand 
it more n a minute longer, but I set my teeth hard and got 
ready to try. Just then Jim begun to breathe heavy; next he 
begun to snore and then I was pretty soon comfortable again. 

Tom he made a sign to me—kind of a little noise with his 
mouth and we went creeping away on our hands and knees. 
When we i^ras ten foot off, Tom whispered to me and wanted 
to tie Jim to the tree for fun; but I said no; he might wake 
and make a disturbance, and then they’d find out I wam’t in. 

on Tom said he hadn’t got candles enough, and he would 


10 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


slip in the kitchen and get some more. I didn’t want him to 
try. I said Jim might wake up and come. But Tom wanted 
to resk it; so we slid in there and got three candles, and Tom 
laid five cents on the table for pay. Then we got out, and I 
was in a sweat to get away ; but nothing would do Tom but he 
must crawl to where Jim was, on his hands and knees, and 
play something on him. I waited, and it seemed a good while, 
everything was so still and lonesome 

As soon as Tom was back, we cut along the path, around 
the garden fence, and by-and-by fetched up on the steep top 
of the hill the other side of the house. Tom said he slipped 
Jim’s hat off of his head and hung it on a limb right over him, 
and Jim stirred a little, but he didn’t wake. Afterwards Jim 
said the witches bewitched him and put him in a trance, and 
rode him all over the State, and then set him under the trees 
again and hung his hat on a limb to show who dune it. And 
next time Jim told it he said they rode him down to New 
Orleans; and after that, every time he told it he spread it 
more and more, till by-and-by he said they rode him all over 
the world, and tired him most to death, and his back was all 
over saddle-boils. Jim was monstrous proud about it, and he 
got so he wouldn’t hardly notice the other niggers. Niggera 
would come miles to hear Jim tell about it, and he was more 
looked up to than any nigger in that country. Strange niggers 
would stand with their mouths open and look him all over, 
same as if he was a wonder. Niggers is always talking about 
witches in the dark by the kitchen fire; but whenever one 
was talking and letting on to know all about such things, Jim 
would happen in and say, “Hml What you know ’bout 
witches ? ” and that nigger was corked up and had to take a 
back seat. Jim always kept that five-center piece around his 
neck with a string, and said it was a charm the devil give to 
him with his own hands and told him he could cure anybody 


JIM I 


11 



with it and fetch witches whenever he wanted to, just by say¬ 
ing something to it; but he never told what it was he said to 
it. Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim 
anything they had, just for a sight of that five-center piece; 
but they wouldn’t touch it, because the devil bad had bis 
bands on it. Jim was most ruined, for a servant, because he 



JIM I 


got so stuck up on account of having seen the devil and been 
rode by witches. 

Well, when Tom and me got to the edge of the hill-top, we 
Wked away down into the village and could see three or four 
lights twinkling, where there was sick folks, maybe; and the 
stars over us was sparkling ever so fine; and down by the 



12 


TUB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


village was the river, a whole mile broad, and awful still and 
grand. We went down the hill and found Jo Harper, and Ben 
Rogers, and two or three more of the boys, hid in the old lan¬ 
yard. So we unhitched a skiff and pulled down the river two 
mile and a half, to the big scar on the hillside, and went ashore. 

We went to a clump of bushes, and Tom made everybody 



TOM SAWVtIi'S iJAND OF UOlUjElls. 


swear to keep the secret, and then showed them a hole in the 
hill, right in the thickest part of the bushes. Then we lit the 
candles and crawled in on our bands and knees. We went 
about two hundred yards, and then the cave opened up. Tom 
poked about amongst the passages and pretty soon ducked 
under a wall where you wouldn’t a noticed that there was a 
hole. We went along a narrow place and got into a kind of 

room, all damp and sweaty and cold, and there we stopped. 
Tom sav ,; 














lOM 


13 


“Now we’ll start this band of robbers and call it Tom 
Sawyer’s G-ang. Everybody that wants to join has got to take 
an oath, and write his name in blood.” 

Everybody was willing. So Tom got out a sheet of paper 
that he had wrote the oath on, and read it. It swore every 
boy to stick to the band, and never tell any of the secrets; and 
if anybody done anything to any boy in the band, whichever 
boy was ordered to kiU that person and his family must do it, 
and he mustn’t eat and he mustn’t sleep till he had killed them 
and hacked a cross in their breasts, which was the sign of the 
band. And nobody that didn’t belong to the band could use 
that mark, and if he did he must be sued; and if he done it 
again he must be killed. And if anybody that belonged to the 
band told the secrets, he must have his throat cut, and then 
have his carcass burnt up and the ashes scattered all around, 
and his name blotted off of the list with blood and never men¬ 
tioned again by the gang, but have a curse put on it and be 
forgot, for ever. 

Everybody said it was a real beautiful oath, and asked Tom 
if he got it out of his own head. He said, some qf it, but the 
rest was out of pirate books, and robber books, and every gang 
that was high-toned had it. 

Some thought it would be good to kill ihJjamiilies of boys 
t at told the secret^. Tom said it was a good idea^ so he took 
a pencil and wrote it in. Then Ben Rogers says: 

^ Heres Huck Finn, he hain’t got no family—what you 

gomg to do T)ont him ? ” 

“Well, hmn’t he got a father ? ” says Tom Sawyer. 

he 8 got a father, but you can’t never find him, these 

, ® ^ ^^7 drunk with the hogs in the tanyard, 

tiut^ ham t been seen in these parts for a year or more.” 

Ahey^ed it over, and they was going to rule me out, 
ey said every boy most have a family or somebody 



14 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


to kill, or else it wouldn’t be fair and square for the others. 
Well, nobody could think of anything to do—everybody was 
stumped, and set still. I was most ready to cry; but all at 
once I thought of a way, and so I offered them Miss Watson— 
they could kill her. Everybody said: 

“ Oh, she’ll do, she’ll do. That’s all right. Huck can 
come in.” 

Then they all stuck a pin in their fingers to get blood te 
sign with, and I made my mark on the paper. 

“ Now,” says Ben Rogers, “ what’s the line of business of 
this Gang ? ” 

“ Nothing only robbery and murder,” Tom said. 

“ But who are we going to rob ? houses—or cattle— 
or-” 

‘‘Stuff! stealing cattle and such things ain’t robbery, it’s 
•urglary,” says Tom Sawyer. “ We ain’t burglars. That ain’t 
no sort of style. We are highwaymen. We stop stages and 
carriages on the road, with masks on, and kill the people and 
take their watches and money.” 

“ Must we always kill the people ? ” 

“ Oh, certainly. It’s best. Some authorities think diffe¬ 
rent, but mostly it’s considered best to kill them. Except some 
that you bring to the cave here and keep them till they’re 
ran sorned.” 

“ Ransomed ? What’s that ? ” 

“ I don’t know. But that’s what they do. I’ve seen it in 
books; and so of course that’s what we’ve got to do.” 

“ But how can we do it if we don’t know what it is?” 

“ Why blame it all, we’ve (fot to do it. Don’t I tell you it’s 
in the books? Do you want to go to doing different from 
what’s in the books, and get things all muddled up?” 

“ Oh, that’s all very fine to say^ Tom Sawyer, but how in 
the nation arc these fellows going to be ransomed if we don’t 



DEEP-LAW PLANS. 


16 


know how to do it to them ? that’s the thing I want to get at. 
Now what do you reckon it is ? ” 

“ Well, I don’t know. But per’aps if we keep them till 
they’re ransomed, it means that we keep them till they’re dead.” 

“ Now, that’s something That’ll answer. Why couldn’t 
you said that before ? We’ll keep them till they’re ransomed 
to death—and a bothersome lot they’ll be, too, eating up every¬ 
thing and always trying to get loos-i.” 

“ How you talk, Ben Rogers. How can they get loose when 
there’s a guard over them, ready to shoot them down if they 
move a peg ? ” 

‘‘ A guard. Well, that is good. So somebody’s got to set 
up all night and never get any sleep, just so as to watch them. 
I think that’s foolishness. Why can’t a body take a club and 
ransom them as soon as they get here ? ” 

“ Because it ain’t in the books so—that’s why. Now Ben 
Rogers, do you want to do things regular, or don't you ?— 
that s the idea. Don’t you reckon that the people that ujade 
the books knows what’s the correct thing to do? Do you 
reckon you can learn ’em anything ? Not by a good deal. 
No, sir, we 11 just go on and ransom them in the regular way.” 

All right. I don’t mind; but I say it’s a fool way, any¬ 
how. Say—do we kill the women, too ? ” 

“ ell, Ben Rogers, if I was as ignorant as you I wouldn’t 

let on. Kill the women? No—nobody ever saw anything in 

the books like that. You fetch them to the cave, and you’re 

always as polite as pie to them; and by-and-by they fall in 

love with you and never want to go home any more.” 

\\ ell, if that’s the way, I’m agreed, but I don’t take no 

c in it. Mighty soon we’ll have the cave so cluttered up 

wit women, and teliows waiting to De ransomed, that there 

won t be no place for the robbers. But go ahead, 1 ain’t got 
nothing to say.” ® 


10 THE ADVENTURES OF JIUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

Little Tommy Barnes was asleep, now, and when they waked 
him up he was scared, and cried, and said he wanted to go 
home to his ma, and didn't want to be a robber any more. 

So they all made fun of him, and called him cry-baby, and 
that made him mad, and he said he would go straight and tell 
all the secrets. But Tom give him five cents to keep quiet, 
and said we would all go home and meet next week and rob 
somebody and kill some people. 

Ben Rogers said he couldn’t get out much, only Sundays, 
and so he wanted to begin next Sunday; but all the boys said 
it would be wicked to do it on Sunday, and that settled the 
thing. They agreed to get together and fix a day as soon as 
they could, and then we elected Tom Sawyer first captain and 
Jo Harper second captain of the Gang, and so started home. 

I dumb up the shed and crept into my window just before 
day was breaking. My new clothes was all greased up and 
clayey, and I was dog-tired. 



HL’CK CHEEPS INTO UlS WINDOW 




f 


I I* * r> 

. . i . •. I 


CHAPTER III.


r got a good going-over in 
the morning, from old Mijjs 
W atson, on account of my 
clothes; but the widow she 
didn’t scold, but only cleaned 
off the grease and clay, and 
looked so sorry that I 
thought I would behave a 
while if I cduld. Then Miss 
Wats<^ she took me in the 
cbset and prayed, but noth¬ 
ing come of it. She told 
me to pray every day, and 
whatever I asked for I would 
get it. But it wam’t so. I 
tried it. Once I got a fish- 
Misa WATSON'S LECTDEB. Hue, but DO hooks. It wam’t 

I , . any good to me without 

hooks three or four times, but somehow 
1 ^uldn t make it work. By-and-by, one day, I asked Miss 

t I j ° for me, but she said I was a fool. She never 

told me why, and I couldn’t make it out no way. 

I set down, one time, back in the woods, and had a long 
hmk about it I says to myself, if a body can get anything 

0 





18 


THE ADVEyTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIXN. 


they pruy for, why don’t Deacon Winn get back the money he 
lost on pork ? \\ by can’t the widow get back her silver snuff¬ 

box that was stole? Why can’t Miss Watson fat up? No, 
5ays I to myself, there ain’t nothin<r in it. I went and told the 


widow about it, and she said the thing a body could get by 
praying for it was “ spiritual gifts.” This was too many for 
me, but she told me what she meant—I must help other 
people, and do everything I could for other people, and look 
out for them all the time, and never think about myself. This 
was including Miss ^^atson, as I took it. I went out in the 


woods and turned it over in my mind a long time, but I couldn’t 
see no advantage about it—except for the other people—so at 
last I reckoned I wouldn't worry about it any more, but just 
let it go. Sometimes the widow would take me one side 
and talk about Providence in a way to make a body’s mouth 
water; but maybe next day Miss Watson would take hold and 
knock it all down ag.iin. [ judged I could see that there was 
two Providences, and a poor chap would stand considerable 
show with the widow’s Providence, but if Miss Watson’s got 
him there warn’t no hel)) for him any more. I thought it all 
out, and reckoned I would belong to the widow’s, if he wanted 
me, though I couldn’t make out how he was agoing to be any 
better off then than what he was before, seeing I was so igno¬ 
rant and so kind of low-down and ornery. 

Pap he iiadn’t been seen for more than a year, and that was 
comfortable for me ; I didn’t want to see him no more. He 
used to always whale me when he was sober and could get his 
hands on me ; though 1 used to take to the woods most of the 
time when he was around. Well, about this time he was found 


in the river drowned, about twelve mile above town, so people 
said. They judged it was him, anyway; said this drowned man 
was jmt his size, and was ragge.l, and had .mcommon long hair 
—which was all like pap—but they couldn’t make nothing out 



PLAYI^'G ROTIBERS. 


19 


of the face, because it had been in the water so long it waru’t 
much like a face at all. They said he was floating on his back 
in the water. They took him and buried him on the bank. 
But I warn’t comfortable long, because I happened to think of 
something. I knowed mighty well that a drownded man don’t 
float on his back, but on his face. So I knowed, then, that this 
wam’t pap, but a woman dressed up in a man’s clothes. So I 
was uncomfortable again. I judged the old man woultl turn 
op again by-and-by, though I wished he wouldn’t. 

We played robbers now and then about a month, and tlien I 
resigned. All the boys did. We hadn’t robl^ed nobody, we 
hadn’t killed any people, but only just pretended.. We used to 
hop out of the woods and go charging down on hog-drovers and 
women in carts taking garden stuff to market, but we never 
hived any of them. Tom Sawyer called the hogs “ ingots,” and 
he called the turnips and stuflf “ julery,” and we would go to the 
cave and pow-wow over what we had done and how many jieople 
we had killed and marked. But I couldn’t see no profit in it. 
One time Tom sent a boy to run about town with a blazing 
stick, which he called a slogan (which was the sign for the 
Gang to get together), and then he said he had got secret news 
by his spies that next day a whole parcel of Spanish merchants 
and rich A-rabs was going to camp in Cave Hollow with two 
hundred elephants, and six hundred camels, and over a thousand 
“sumter” mules, all loaded down with di’monds, and they 
didn t have only a guard of four hundred soldiers, and so we 
would lay in ambuscade, as he called it, and kill the h.t and 
scoop the things. He said we must slick up our swords and 
guns, and get ready. He never could go after even a turuip- 
Wirt but he must have the swords and guns all scoured up ^ - 
it, though they was only lath and broom-sticks, and 
might scour at them till you rotted, and then they warn't woi^^ 
a mouthful of ashes more than what they was before. I didn’t 


•>0 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

believe we could lick such a crowd of Spaniards and A-rabs, 
but I wanted to see the camels and elephants, so I was on hand 
next day, Saturday, in the ambuscade; and when we got the 
word, we rushed out of the woods and down the hill. J-lut 



THK ROBBERS DISPERSED. 


there wam’t no Spaniards and A-rabs, and there wam’t no 
eam^s nor no elephants. It warn’t anything but a Sunday- 
school picnic, and only a primer-class at that. We busted it 
up, and chased the children up the hollow ; but we never got 
anything but some doughnuts and jam, though Ben Rogers 



THB OENTES. 


21 


got a rag doll, and Jo Harper got a hymn-book and a tract; 
and then the teacher charged in and made us drop everything 
and cut. I didn’t see no di’monds, and I told Tom Sawyer so. 
He said there was loads of them there, anyway; and he said 
there was A-rabs there, too, and elephants and things. I said, 
why couldn’t we see them, then ? He said if I warn t so 
ignorant, but had read a book called “ Don Quixote, I would 
know without asking. He said it was all done by enchantment. 
He said there was hundreds of soldiers there, and elephants 
and treasure, and so on, but we had enemies which he called 
magicians, and they had turned the whole thing into an infant 
Sunday school, just out of spite. I said all right, then the 
thing for us to do was to go for the magicians. Tom Sawyer 
said I was a numskull. 

“ Why,” says he, “a magician could call up a lot of geiiies, 
aud they would hash you up like nothing before you could say 
Jack Robinson. They are as tall as a tree and as big around 
as a church.” 

“Well,” I says, “ s’pose we got some genies to help 'iis — 
ciin’t we lick the other crowd then ? ” 

“ How you going to get them ? ” 

“ I don’t know. How do they get them ? ” 

“Why, they rub an old tin lamp or an iron ring, and then 
the genies come tearing in, with the thunder and lightning a- 
ripping around and the smoke a-rolling, and everything they’re 
told to do they up and do it. They don’t think nothing of 
pulling a shot tower up by the roots, and belting a Sunday 
school superintendent over the head with it—or any other man.* 
“ Who makes them tear around so ? ” 

“Why, whoever mbs the lamp or the ring. They belong 
to whoever rubs the lamp or the ring, and they’ve got to do 
whatever he says. If he tells them to build a palace forty 
miles long, out of di’monds, and fill it full of chewing gum, or 


22 TUB ABVEyTUTiES OF TIUCKLBBBRRY FINN. 

whatever you want, and fetch an emperor’s daughter from 
China for you to marry, they’ve got to do it—and they’ve got 
to do it before sun-up next morning, too. And more—they’ve 
got to wah» that palace around over the country wherever you 
want it, yon understand.” 



EUBBINO THE LAMP. 


“Well,” says T, “ I think they are a pack of natheads for 
not keeping the palace themselves ’stead of fooling them away 
like that. And what’s more—if I was one of them 1 would see 

a man m Jericho before 1 would drop my business and come to 
him for the rubbing of an old tin lamp.” 



" ONE OF TOM SA WYER'S LIES." 


28 


« How you talk, Huck Finn. Why, you’d have to come when 

he rubbed it, whether you wanted to or not.” 

« What, and I as high as a tree and as big as a church ? 
All right, then ; I would come ; but I lay I’d make that man 
climb the highest tree there was in the country. 

« Shucks, it ain’t no use to talk to you, Huck Finn. Yon 
don’t seem to know anything, somehow—perfect sap-head. 

I thought all this over for two or three days, and then I 
reckoned I would see if there was anything in it. I got an 
old tin lamp and an iron ring and went out in the woods and 
rubbed and rubbed till I sweat like an Injun, calculating to 
build a palace and sell it; but it wam’t no use, none of the 
genies come. So then I judged that all that stuff was only 
just one of Tom Sawyer’s lies. I reckoned he believed in the 
A-rabs and the elephants, but as for me I think different. It 
had all the marks of a Sunday school. 





CHAPTER IV.

Wkt.l, 


three or four 
months run along, 
and it was well into 
the winter, now. I 
had been to school 
most all the time, 
and could spell, and 
read, and writejust 
a little, and could 
tlie multipli¬ 
cation table up to 
six times seven is 
thirty-five, and 1 
don’t reckon I could 
ever get anyfurther 
than that if I was 
to live for ever. I 
don’t take no stock 
in mathematics, 
anyway. 

the schor.!, but bv-aud-by I got sd I could standit. '’‘^Vheneta 
I got uuconnuon tired I played hookey, and the biding I got' 
next day done me good and cheered me up. So the longer I 


•^SLOW BUT SURE” 


35 


went to school the easier it got to be. I was getting sort of 
used to the widow’s ways, too, and they warn t so raspy on me. 
Living in a house, and sleeping in a bed, pulled on me pretty 
tight, mostly, but before the cold weather I used to slide out 
and sleep in the woods, sometimes, and so that was a rest to 
me. I liked the old ways best, but I was getting so I liked 
the new ones, too, a little bit. The widow said I was coming 
along slow but sure, and doing very satisfactory. She said she 
wam’t ashamed of me. 

One morning I happened to turn over the salt-cellar at 
breakfast. I reached for some of it as quick as I could, to 
throw over my left shoulder and keep off the bad luck, but 
Miss Watson was in ahead of me, and crossed me off. She 
says, “ Take your hands away, Huckleberry—what a mess you 
are always making! ” The widow put in a good word for me, 
but that wam’t going to keep off the bad luck, I knowed that 
well enough. I started out, after breakfast, feeling worrietl 
and shaky, and wondering where it was going to fall on me, 
and what it was going to be. There is ways to keep off some 
kinds of bad luck, but this wasn’t one of them kind; so I never 
tried to do anything, but just poked along low-spirited and on 
the watch-out. 

I went down the front garden and dumb over the stile, 
where you go through the high board fence. There was an 
inch of new snow on the ground, and I seen somebody’s tracks. 
They had come up from the quarry and stood around the stile 
a while, and then went on around the garden fence. It was 
funny they hadn’t come in, after standing around so. I 
couldn t make it out. It was very curious, somehow. I was 
going to follow around, but I stooped down to look at the 
tracks 6rst. I didn’t notice anything at first, but next I did. 

There was a cross in the left boot-heel made with big nails, to 
keep off the devil. 


26 THE ADVEmVIiES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

I was up in a second and shinning dovm the hill. I looked 
over mj shoulder every now and then, but I didn’t see no¬ 
body. I was at Judge Thatcher’s as quick as I could get there. 
He said: 

“ ^V^ly, my boy, you are all out of breath. Did you come 
for your interest ? ” 



JUDGE THATCHER RURPR1B8D, 


« No, sir,” I says ; “ is there some for me ? ” 

“ Oh, yes, a half-yearly is in, last night. Over a hundred 
and fifty dollars. Quite a fortune for you. Yon better let me 
invest it along with your six thousand, because if you take it 
ytm’ll spend it.” 

“ No, sir. I says, ** I don’t want to spend it. I don’t want . 


37 


JUDGE THATCHER SURPRISED. 

it at all-nor the six thousand, nuther. I want you to take 
it; I want to give it to you-the six thousand and a 1. 

He looked surprised. He couldn’t seem to make it out. 

9 ” 

« WTiy, what can you mean, my boy r 

I says, “ Don’t you ask me no questions about it, please. 

You’ll take i^-won’t you ? ” 

He says: 

“Well, I’m puzzled. Is something the matter ? 

“ Please take it,” says I, “ and don’t ask me nothing—then 

I won’t have to tell no lies.” 

He studied a while, and then he says: 

“ Oho-o. I think I see. You want to sell all your pro¬ 
perty to me—not give it. That’s the correct idea. 

Then he wrote something on a paper and read it over, and 

says: 

“There—you see it says ‘for a consideration.’ That means 
I have bought it of you and paid you for it. Here s a dollar 
for you. Now, you sign it.” 

So I signed it, and left. 

Miss Watson’s nigger, Jim, had a hair-ball as big as youi 
fist, which had been took out of the fourth stomach of an ox, 
and he used to do magic with it He said there was a spirit 
inside of it, and it knowed everything. So I went to him that 
right and told him pap was here again, for I found his tracks 
in the snow. What I wanted to know, was, what he was going 
to do, and was he going to stay ? Jim got out his hair-ball, 
and said something over it, and then he held it up and dropped 
it on the floor. It fell pretty solid, and only rolled about an 
inch. Jim tried it again, and then another time, and it acted 
]ust the same. Jim got down on his knees and put his ear 
against it and listened. But it warn’t no use ; he said it 
wouldn’t talk. He said sometimes it wouldn’t talk without 



28 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


money. I told him I had an old slick counterfeit quarter that 
warn’t no good because the brass showed through the silver a 
little, and it wouldn’t pass nohow, even if the brass didn’t 
show, because it was so slick it felt greasy, and so that would 
tell on it every time. (I reckoned I wouldn’t say nothing 
about the dollar I got from the judge.) I said it was pretty 



JIM LISTKMNO. 


bad money, but maybe the hair-ball would take it, because 
maybe it wouldn’t know the difference. Jim smelt it, and bit 
it, and rubbed it, and said he would manage so the hair-ball 
would think it was good. He said he would split open a raw 
Irish potato and stick the quarter in between and keep it there 
all night, and next morning you couldn’t see no brass, and it 
wouldn t feel greasy no more, and so anybody in town would 
take it in a minute, let alone a hair-ball. Well, I knowed a 
potato would do that, before, but I had forgot it. 

Jim put the qiiarter under the hair-hall and got down and 
listened again. Ihis time he said the hair-ball was all right. 



SUPERSTITION. 


20 


He said it would tell my whole fortune if I wanted it to. 1 
says, go on. So the hair-ball talked to Jim, and J.m told it to 

me. He says: , , . j 

“ Yo’ ole father doan’ know, yit, what he s a~gwyne to do. 

Sometimes he spec he’U go ’way, en den agin he spec he’ll 

Stay. De bes’ way is to res’ easy en let de ole man take his 

own way. Dey’s two angels hoverin’ roun’ ’bout him. One uv 

’em is white en shiny, en t’other one is black. De white one 

gits him to go right, a little while, den de black one sail m en 

bust it all up. A body can’t tell, yit, which one gwyne to fetch 

him at de las’. But you is all right. You gwyne to have con- 

sidable trouble in yo’ Ufe, en considable joy. Sometimes you 

gwyne to git hurt, en sometimes you gwyne to git sick ; but 

every time you’s gwyne to git well agin. Dey s two gals flyin 

’bout you in yo’ life. One uv’em’s light en t’other one is dark. 

One is rich en t’other is po’. You’s gwyne to marry de po one 

fust en de rich one by-en-by. You want to keep ’way fum de 

water as much as you kin, en don’t run no resk, ’kase it’s down 

in de bills dat you’s gwyne to git hung.” 

When I lit my candle and went up to my room that iiighl. 
there set pap, his own self I 



o 

CHAPTER V.


HAD shut the door to. 
Then I turned around, 
and tliere he was. I 
used to Uj scared of 
him all the time, he 
tanned me so much. I 
reckoned I was scared 
now, too; but in a 
minute I see I was 
mistaken. That is, 
after the first jolt, as 
you may say, when rny 
breath sort of hitched 
—he being so unex¬ 
pected ; but right a- 
way after, I see I warn’t 
scared of him worth 
bothering about. 

He was most fifty, 
and he looked it. His 


hair was long and tangled and greasy, and hung down, and you 
could see his eyes shining through like he was behind vines. 
It was all black, no gray ; so was bis long, mixed-up whiskers. 
There wiirn’t no colour in his face, where his face sb<.wed; it 


« PApr 


81 


was white; not like another man’s white, but a white to make 
a body sick, a white to make a body’s Hesh crawl—a tree-toad 
white, a fish-belly white. As for his clothes—just rags, that 
was all. He had one ankle resting on t’other knee ; the boot 
on that foot was busted, and two of his toes stuck through, 
and he worked them now and then. His hat was laying on 
the floor; an old black slouch with the top caved in, like a 
lid, 

I stood a-looking at him ; he set there a-looking at me, 
with his chair tilted back a little, I set the candle down. I 
noticed the window was up; so he had dumb in by the shed. 
He kept a-looking me all over. By-and-by he says : 

“Starchy clothes—very. You think you’re a good deal of 
a big-bug, donH you? ” 

“ Maybe I am, maybe I ain’t,” I says. 

“Don’t you give me none o’ your lip,” says he. “ You’ve 
put on considerble many frills since I been away. I’ll tike 
you down a peg before I get done with you. You’re educated, 
too, they say; can read and write. You think you’re better’n 
your father, now, don’t you, because he can’t? /’ll take it out 
of you. Who told you you might meddle with such hifalut’n 
foolishness, hey?—who told you you could ? ” 

“ The widow. She told me.” 

“ The widow, hey ?—and who told the widow she could put 
in her shovel about a thing that ain’t none of her business ? ” 

“ Nobody never told her.” 

“ Well, I’ll learn her how to meddle. And looky here— 
you drop that school, you hear? I’ll learn people to bring up 
a boy to put on airs over his own father and let on to be better’n 
what he is. You lemme catch you fooling around that school 
again, you bear ? Your mother couldn’t read, and she couldn’t 
write, nuther, before she died. None of the family couldn’t, 
efore ihxy died, / can’t; and here you’re a-swelUng youxaelf 



SI 


THE ADVENTURES OF HVCKLEBERRY FINN. 


np like this. I ain’t the man to stand it—you hear? Say— 
lemme hear you read.” 

I took up a book and begun something about General 
V\ashington and the wars. When I’d read about a half minute, 
he fetched the book a whack with his hand and knocked it 
across the house. He says: 

“ Its so. \ou can do it. I had my doubts when you told 



me. Now looky here ; you stop that putting on frills. I won’t 
have it. I’ll lay for you, my srnarty; and if I catch you about 
that school I’ll tan you good. First you know you’ll get religion, 
too. I never see such a son.” 

He took up a Uttle blue and yaller picture of some cows and 
a boy, and says : 

“What’s this?” 

“ It’s something they give me for learning my lessons good ” 



THE FOND PARENT. 


83 


He tore it up, and sajs: 

“ m give you something better—I’ll give you a cowhide.” 

He set there a-mumbling and a-growling a minute, and 
then he says: 

“ Ain't you a sweet-scented dandy, though ? A bed ; and 
bedclothes; and a look’n-glass; and a piece of carpet on the 
floor—and your own father got to sleep with the hogs in the 
tanyard. I never see such a son, I bet I’ll take some o’ these 
frills out o’ you before I’m done with you. Why, there ain’t no 
end to your airs—they say you’re rich. Hey ?—how’s that ? ” 

“ They lie—that’s how.” 

“Look} here—mind how you talk to mej I’m a-standing 
about all I can stand, now—so don’t gimme no sass. I’ve been 
in town two days, and I hain’t heard nothing but about you 
bein’ rich. I heard about it away down the river, too. That’s 
why I come. You git me that money to-morrow—I want it.” 

“ I hain’t got no money.” 

“It’s a lie. Judge Thatcher’s got it. You git it. I want 
it.” ® 

“I hain’t got no money, I tell you. You ask Judge That- 
cner; hell tell you the same.^^ 

^ All right. IU ask him; and I’ll make him pungle, too, 
or 111 know the reason why. Say—how much you got in your 
pocket? I want it.” 

“ I hain’t got only a dollar, and I want that to-” 

t don t make no difference what you want it for—you just 

shell it out.” 

He took it and bit it to see if it was good, and then he said 
e was going down town to get some whisky; said he hadn’t 

hi iT d • he had got out on the shed, he put 

in ^ cussed me for putting on frills and try- 

than him ; and when I reckoned he was gone, 

*^6 and put his head in ag,.in, and told me to mind 


1 ) 



TBB ADVEyTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


U 

about that school, because he was going to lay for me and UcIj 
me if I didn’t drop that. 

Next day he was drunk 
and bullyragged him and tried to make him give up the 
money, but he couldn’t, and then he swore he’d make the law 
force him. 

The judge and the \vidow went to law to get the court tc 
take me away from him and let one of them be my guardian; 
but it was a new judge that had just come, and he didn’t know 
the old man; so he said courts mustn’t interfere and separate 
families if they could help it; said he’d druther not take a 
child away from its father. So Judge Thatcher and the widow 
had to quit on the business. 

That please* I the old man till he couldn’t rest. He said he’d 
cowhide me till I was black and blue if I didn’t raise some 
money for him. I borrowed three dollars from Judge Thatcher, 
and pap took it and got drunk and went a-blowing around and 
cussing and whooping and carrying on; and he kept it up all 
over town, with a tin pan, till most midnight; then they jailed 
him, and next day they had him before court, and jailed him 
again for a week. But he said he was satisfied; said he was 
boss of his son, and he’d make it warm for him. 

When he got out the new judge said he was agoing to make 
d man of him. So he took him to his own house, and dressed 
him up clean and nice, and had him to breakfast and dinner 
and supper with the family, and was just old pie to him, so to 
speak. And after supper he talked to him about temperance 
and such things till the old man cried, and said he’d been a 
fool, and fooled away bis life ; but now he was agoing to turn 
over a new leaf and be a man nobody wouldn’t be ashamed of, 
and he hoped the judge would help him and not look down on 
him. Tlie judge said he could hug him for them word.< ; so he 
cried, and his wife she cried again ; pap said he’d been a man 


, and he went to Judge Thatchers 



REFORM. 


35 


that had aways been misunderstood before, and the judge said 
he believed it. The old man said that what a man wanted that 
was down, was sympathy; and the judge said it was so; so 
they cried again. And when it was bedtime, the old man rose 
up and held out his hand, and says: 

“Look at it, gentlemen, and ladies all; take ahold of it; 
shake it. There’s a hand that was the hand of a hog ; but it 



RKrOEMINQ THB DailX KAft n, 


ein t (to no more; it s the hand of a man that’s started in on a 

new life, and U die before he’ll go back. You mark them 

wo s don t forget I said them. It’s a clean band now; shake 
it—don’t be afeard.” 

Th ^ shook it, une after the other, all around, and cded. 

e ju ges wife she kissed it. Then the old man he signed a 
P ® g® made his mark. The judge said it was the holiest 
Ume on record, or something like that. Then they tucked the 












S6 TITE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 

old man into a beautiful room, which was the spare room, and 
in the night sometime he got powerful thirsty and dumb out 
on to the porch-roof and slid down a stanchion and traded his 
new coat for a jug of forty-rod, and dumb back again and had 
a good old time; and towards daylight he crawled out again, 
dnink as a fiddler, and rolled off the porch and broke his left 
arm in two places and was most froze to death when somebody 
found him after sun-up. And when they come to look at that 
spare room, they had to take soundings before they could navi¬ 
gate it. 

Ihe Judge he felt kind of soie. fie Siiid he reckoned a 
body could reform the ole man with a shot-gun, maybe, but he 
didn't know no other way. 



FALIJXG Fll0^f CP.ACH 


CHAPTER VI.

pretty soon the old man was up 
and around again, and then 
be went for Judge Thatcher 
in the courts to make him 
give up that money, and he 
went for me, too, for not 
stopping school. He catched 
me a couple of times and 
thrashed me, but I went to 
school just the same, and 
dodged him or out-run him 
most of the time. I didn’t 
want to go to school much, 
before, but I reckoned I’d 
go now to spite pap. That 
law trial was a slow business; 

OBTima OUT OF THE WAT. appeared like they warn’t 

ever going to get started on 
it; 80 every now and then I’d borrow two or three dollars oif of 
the judge for him, to keep from getting a cowhiding. Every time 
he got money he got drunk; and every time he got drunk he 
raised Cain around town; and every time he raised Cain he 

got jailed. He was just suited—this kind of thing was right in 
his line. 




38 TM£ AD VESTUliEii OF HUCKLEBERRY FINK. 

He got to hanging around the widow’s too much, and so 
she told him at last, that if he didn’t quit using around there 
she would make trouble for him. Well, wasn't he mad ? He 
said he would show who was Huck Finn’s boss. So he watched 
out for me one day in the spring, and catched me, and took 
me up the river about three mile, in a skiff, and crossed over 
to the Illinois shore where it was woody and there wam’t no 
houses but an old log hut in a place where the timber was so 
thick you couldn’t find it if you didn’t know where it was. 

He kept me with him all the time, and I never got a chance 
to run off. We lived in that old cabin, and he always locked 
the door and put the key under his head, nights. He had a 
gun which he had stole, I reckon, and we fished and hunted, 
mid that was what we lived on. Every little while he locked 
me in and went down to the store, three miles to the ferry, 
and traded fish and game for whisky and fetched it home and 
got drunk and had a good time, and licked me. The widow 
she found out where I was by-and-by, and she sent a man over 
to try to get hold of me, but pap drove him off with the gun, 
and it warn’t long after that till I was used to being where I 
was, and liked it, all but the cowhide part. 

It was kind of lazy and jolly, laying off comfortable all day, 
smoking and fishing, and no books nor study. Two months or 
more run along, and my clothes got to be all rags and dirt, and 
I didn’t see how I’d ever got to like it so well at the widow’s, 
where you had to wash, and eat on a plate, and comb up, and 
go to bed and get u]> regular, and be for ever bothering over a 
book and have old Mi.'S atson pecking at you all the time. 
I didn t want to go back no more. 1 had stoi)ped cussing, 
because the widow didn’t like it; but now I took to it again 
because pap hadn t no objections. It was pretty good times 
up in the woods there, take it all around. 

But by-and-by pap got too handy with his hick’ry, and I 



BUCK DECIDES TO LEA VB. 


39 


couldn’t stand it. I was all over welts. He g-d to going away 
BO much, too, and locking me in. Once he locked me in and 
was gone three days. It was dreadful lonesome. 1 judgerl he 
had got drowned and I wasn’t ever going to get out any more. 
I was scared. I made up my mind I would fix up some way to 
leave there, I had tried to get out of that cabin many a time, 
but I couldn’t find no way. There warn’t a window to it big 
enough for a dog to get through. I couldn’t get up the 



SO Lin COMFOUT. 


chiinbly, it was too narrow. The door was thick solid oak slabs. 
Pap was pretty careful not to leave a knife or anything in the 
cabin when he was away; I reckon I had hunted the place over 
ts much as a hundred times ; well, I was ’most all the time at 
it, because it was about the only way to put in the time. But 
this time 1 found something at last; I found an old rusty 
wood-saw without any handle ; it was laid in between a rafter 
and the clapboards of the roof. I greased it up and went tc 



40 TUB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


work. There was an old horse-blanket nailed against the logs 
at the far end of the cabin behind the table, to keep the wind 
from blowing through the chinks and putting the candle out. 
I got under the table and raised the blanket and went to 
work to saw a section of the big bottom log out, big enough to 
let me through. Well, it was a good long job, but I was getting 
towards the end of it when I heard pap’s gun in the woods. I 
got rid of the signs of my wcirk, and dropped the blanket and 
hid my saw, and pretty soon pap come in. 

Pap warn’t in a good humour—so he was his natural self. 
He said he was down to town, and everything was going wrong. 
His lawyer said he reckoned he would win his lawsuit and get 
the money, if they ever got started on the trial; but then 
there was ways to put it off a long time, and Judge Thatcher 
knowed how to do it. And he said people allowed there’d be 
another trial to get me away from him and give me to the 
widow for my guardian, and they guessed it would win, this 
time. This shook me up considerable, because I didn’t want 
to go back to the widow’s any more and be so cramped up, and 
sivilised, as they called it. Then the old man got to cussing, 
and cussed everything and everybody he could think of, and 
then cussed them all over again to make sure he hadn’t skipped 
any, and after that he polished off with a kind of a general cuss 
all round, including a considerable parcel of people which he 
didn’t know the names of, and so called them what’s-his-name, 
when he got to them, and went right along with his cussing. 

He said he would like to see the widow get me. He said 
he would watch out, and if they tried to come any such game 
on him he knowed of a place six or seven mile off, to stow me 
in, where they might hunt till they dropped and they couldn’t 
find me. That made me pretty uneasy again, but only for a 
minute; I reckoned I wouldn’t stay on hand till he got that 
chance. 



TMINKINQ IT OVER. 


41 


The old man made me go to the skiff and fetoh the things 
be had got. There was a fifty-pound sack of com meal, ami a 
side of bacon, ammunition, and a four-gallon jug of whisky, 
and an old book and two newspapers for wadding, besides some 
tow. I toted up a load, and went back and set down on the 



THli^IKO IT OVEB. 


bow of the skid* to rest. I thought it all over, and I reckoned 
I would walk off with the gun and some lines, and take to the 
woods when I run away. I guessed I wouldn’t stay in one 
place, hut just tramp right across the country, mostly night 
times, and hunt and fish to keep alive, and so get so far away 
that the old man nor the widow conldn’t ever find me any more. 



12 


TKE ABVE'STTJItBS OF HTJCKI^BERRY FINF. 


T judged I would saw out and leave that night if pap got drunk 
enough, and I reckoned he would. I got so full of it I didn’t 
notice how long I was staying, till the old man hollered and 
asked me whether I was asleep or drownded. 

I got the things all up to the cabin, and then it was about 
dark. While I was cooking supper the old man took a swig or 
two and got sort of warmed up, and went to ripping again. 
He had been drunk over in town, and laid in the gutter all 
night, and he was a sight to look at. A body would a thought 
he was Adam, he was just all mud. Whenever his liquor begun 
to work, he most always went for the govment. This time he 
says: 

“ Call this a govment I why, just look at it and see what it’s 
like. Here’s the law a-standing ready to take a man’s son away 
from him—a man’s own son, which he has had all the trouble 
and all the anxiety and all the expense of raising. Yes, just 
as that man has got that son raised at last, and ready to go to 
work and begin to do suthin’ for him and give him a rest, the 
law up and goes for him. And they call that govment! That 
ain’t all, nuther. The law backs that old Judge Thatcher up and 
helps him to keep me out o’ my property. Here’s what the 
law does. The law takes a man worth six thousand dollars and 
upards, and jams him into an old trap of a cabin like this, and 
lets him go round in clothes that ain’t fitten for a hog. They 
call that govment! A man can’t get his rights in a govment 
like this. Sometimes I’ve a mighty notion to just leave the 
country for good and all. Yes, and I told ’em so; I told old 
Thatcher so to his face. Lots of ’em heard me, and can tell 
what I said. Says I, for two cents I’d leave the blamed country 
and never come anear it agin. Them’s the very words. I says, 
look at my hat—if you call it a hat—but the lid raises up and 
the refit of it goes down till it’s below my chin, and then it ain’t 
rightly a hat at all, but more like my head was shoved up 



POLITICAL ECOIfOMT. 


49 


through a jint o’ stove-pipe. Look at it, says I—such a hat for 
me to wear—one of the wealthiest men in this town, if I could 

git my rights. 

« Oh, yes, this is a wonderful govment, wonderful. Why, 
looky here. There was a free nigger there, from Ohio; a 
mulatter, most as white as a white man. He had the whitest 
shirt on you ever see, too, and the shiniest hat; and there 
ain’t a man in that town that’s got as fine clothes as what he 
had; and he had a gold watch and chain, and a silver-headed 
cane—the awfullest old grey-headed nabob in the State, And 
what do you think ? they said he was a p’fessor in a college, 
and could talk all kinds of languages, and knowed everything. 
And that ain’t the wust. They said he could vote, when he 
was at home. Well, that let me out. Thinks I, what is the 
country a-coming to? It was ’lection day, and I was just about 
to go and vote, myself, if I wam’t too drunk to get there; but 
when they told me there was a State in this country where 
they’d let that nigger vote, I drawed out. 1 says I’ll never 
vote agin. Them’s the very words I said ; they all heard me ; 
and the country may rot for all me—I’ll never vote agin as long 
as I live. And to see the cool way of that nigger—why, he 
wouldn't a give me the road if I hadn’t shoved him out o’ the 
way. I says to the people, why “ain’t this nigger put up at 
auction and sold ?—that’s what I want to know. And what do 
you reckon they said ? WTiy, they said he couldn’t be sold 
till he’d been in the State six months, and he hadn’t been 
there that long yet. There, now—that’s a specimen. They 
call that a govment that can’t sell a free nigger till he’s been 
in the State six months. Here’s a govment that calls itself a 
gpvment, and lets on to be a govment, and thinks it is a gov¬ 
ment, and yet’s got to set stock-still for six whole months 
before it can take ahold of a prowling, thieving, infernal, wbite- 
ghirted free nigger, and-" 



44 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 



too, all along, here and there. He hopped around the cabin 
considerable, first on one leg and then on the otlier, holding 
first one shin and then the other one, and at last he let out 
with his left foot all of a sudden and fetched the tub a rattling 
kick. But it warn’t good judgment, because that was the boot 
that had a couple of his toes leaking out of the front end of it; 


Pap was agoing on so, he oever noticed where his old limber 
legs was taking him to, so he went head over heels over the 
tub of salt pork, and barked both shins, and the rest of his 
speech was all the hottest kind of language—mostly hove at 
the nigger and the govment, though he give the tubs some, 


RAIBISO A HOWL. 



THRASHING AROUND. 


do now be raised a howl that fairly made a body s ha^r raise^ 
and down he went in the dirt^ and rolled there^ and held his 
toes ; and the cussing he done then laid over anything he had 
ever done previous. He said so his own self, afterwards. He 
had heard old Sowberry Hagan in his best days, and be said it 
laid over him, too; but I reclcon that was sort of piling it on, 
maybe. 

After supper pap took the.jug, and said he bad enough 
whisky there for two drunks and one delirium tremens. That 
was always his word. I judged he would be blind drunk in 
about an hour, and then I would steal the key, or saw myself 
out, one or t’other. He drank and drank, and tumbled down 
on his blankets, by-and-by j but luck didn’t run my way. He 
didn’t go sound asleep, but was uneasy. He groaned, and 
moaned, and thrashed around this way and that, for a long time. 
At last I got so sleepy I couldn’t keep my eyes open, all I 
could do, and so before I knowed what I was about I was sound 
asleep, and the candle burning. 

I don’t know how long I was asleep, but all of a sudden 
there was an awful scream and I was up. There was pap, 
looking wild and skipping around every which way and yelling 
about snakes. He said they was crawling up his legs; and 
then he would give a jump and scream, and say one had bit 
him on the cheek—but I couldn’t see no snakes. He started 
and run round and round the cabin hollering “ take him offl 
take him off! he’s biting me on the neck! ” I never see a man 
look BO wild in the eyes. Pretty soon he was all fagged out, and 
fell down panting; then he rolled over and over, wonderful 
fast, kicking things every which way, and striking and grabbing 
at the air with his hands, and screaming, and saying there was 
devils ahold of him. He wore out, by-and-by, and laid still a 
while, moaning. Then he laid stiller, and didn’t make a sound, 
I could hear the owls and the wolv^, away off in the woods 



46 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


and it seemed terrible still. He was laying over by tbe corner. 
By-and-by be raised up, part way, and listened, with his head 
to one side. He says very low: 

“Tramp—tramp—tramp; that’s the dead; tramp—tramp 
—t^au^p ; they’re coming after me; but I won’t go— Oh, they’re 
here! don’t touch me—don’t! hands off—they’re cold; let go— 
Oh, let a poor devil alone ! ” 

Then he went down on all fours and crawled off begging them 
to let him alone, and he rolled himself np in his blanket and 
wallowed in under the old pine table, still a-begging; and 
then he went to crying. I could hear him through the 
blanket. 

By-and-by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet looking 
wild, and he see me and went forme. He chased me round and 
round the place wit h a clasp-knife, calling me the Angel of Death, 
and saying he would kill me, and then I couldn’t come for him no 
more. I begged, and told him I was only Huck, but he laughed 
suck a screechy laugh, and roared and cussed, and kept on 
chasing me up. Once when I turned short and dodged under 
his arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between'my 
shoulders, and I thought I was gone; but I slid out of the 
jacket quick as lightning, and saved myself. Pretty soon he 
was all tired out, and dropped down with his back against the 
door, and said he would rest a minute and then kill me. He 
put his knife under him, and said he would sleep and get strong, 
and then he would see who was who. 

So he dozed off, pretty soon. By-and-by I got the old splits 
bottom chair and dumb up, as easy as I could, not to make any 
noise, and got down the gun. I slipped the ramrod down it to 
make sure it was loaded, and then I laid it across the tuniip 
barrel, pointing towards pap, and set down behind it to wait 
for him to stir. And how slow and still the time did drag 
along. 



CHAPTER VII.






upt what you'boutI ” 

I opened my eyes 
and looked around, 
trying to make out 
where I was. It was 
after sun-up, and I 
had been sound asleep. 
Pap was standing over 
me, looking sour— 
and sick, too. He 
says— 

“WTiat you doin' 
with this gun ? ” 

I judged he didn’t 
know nothing about 
what he had been 
doing, so I says: 
'Somebody tried to get in, so I was laying for him.” 

“ Why didn’t you roust me out ? ” 

Well, I tried to, but I couldn’t; I couldn’t budge you.” 
Well, all right. Don’t stand there palavering all day, but 
out with you and see if there’s a fish on the lines for breakfast. 
I’U be along in a minute.” 


GIT UP.” 



48 THE Al) VEyrURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

He unlocked the door and I cleared out, up the river bank* 
f noticed some pieces of limbs and such things floating down, 
and a sprinkling of bark; so I knowed the river had begun to 
rise. I reckoned I would have great times, now, if I was over 
atfjiie town. The June rise used to be always luck for me; 
because as soon as that rise begins, here comes cord-wood float¬ 
ing down, and pieces of log rafts—sometimes a dozen logs 
together; so all you have to do is to catch them and sell them 
to the wood yards and the sawmill. 

I went along up the bank with one ej^e out for pap and 
t’other one out for what the rise might fetch along. Well, all 
at once, here comes a canoe; just a beauty, too, about thirteen 
or fourteen foot long, riding high like a duck. I shot head first 
off of the bank, like a frog, clothes and all on, and struck out 
for the canoe. I just expected there’d be somebody^laying 
down in it, because people often done that to fool folks, and 
when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it they’d raise up 
and laugh at ziim. But it warn’t so this time. It was a drift- 
canoe, sure enough, and I dumb in and paddled her ashore. 
Thinks I, the old man will be glad when he sees this—she’s 
worth ten dollars. But when I got to shore pap wasn’t in 
sight yet, and as I was running her into a little creek like a 
gully, all hung over with vines and willows, I struck another 
idea ; I judged I’d hide her good, and then, stead of taking to 
the woods when I run off, I’d go down the river about fifty mile 
and camp in one place for good, and not have such a rough time 
tramping on foot. 

It was pretty close to the shanty, and I thought I heard 
the old man coming, all the time; but I got her hid ; and 
then I out and looked around a bunch of willows, and there 
was the old man down the path apiece just drawing a bead on 
a bird with his gun. So he hadn’t seen anything. 

When he got along, I was hard at it taking np a “ trot ” 



TJIE SHANTY. 49 

line. He abused me a little for being so slow, but I told him 
I fell in the river and that was what made me so long. I knowed 
he would see 1 was wet, and then he would he asking questions. 
We got five cat-fish off of the lines and went home. 

While we laid off, after breakfast, to sleep up, both of us 
being about wore out, I got to thinking that if I could fix up 








TIIE SHANT7. 


some way to keep pap and the widow from trying to follow 

me, it would be a certainer thing than trusting to luck to get 

far enough off before they missed me; you see, all kinds of 

things might happen. Well, I didn’t see no way for a while, 

but by-and-by pap raised up a minute, to drink another barrel 
of water, and he says: 

Another time a man comes a-prowling round here, yon 








50 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


roust me out, you hear? That mau warn’t here for no good. 
I’d a shot him. Nest time, you roust me out, you hear? ” 

Then he dropped down and went to sleep again—but what 
he had been saying give me the very idea I wanted. I says to 
myself, I can fix it now so nobody won’t think of following me. 

About twelve o’clock we turned out and went along up the 
bank. The river was coming up pretty fast, and lots of drift¬ 
wood going by on the rise. By-and-by, along comes part of a 
log raft—nine logs fast together. We went out with the skiff 
and towed it ashore. Then we had dinner. Anybody but pap 
would a waited and seen the day through, so as to catch more 
stuff; but that warn’t pap’s style. Nine logs was enough for 
one time; he must shove right over to town and sell. So he 
locked me in and took the skiff and started off towing the raft 
about half-past three. I judged he wouldn’t come back that 
night. I waited till I reckoned he had got a good start, then 
I out with my saw and went to work on that log again. Before 
he was t’other side of the river I was out of the hole ; him and 
his raft was just a speck on the water away off yonder. 

I took tlie sack of corn meal and took it to where the canoe 
was hid, and shoved the vines and branches apart and put it in ; 
then I done the same with the side of bacon; then the whisky 
jug; I took all the coffee and sugar there was, and all the 
ammunition; I took the wadding; I took the bucket and 
gourd, I took a dipper and a tin cup, and my old saw and two 
blankets, and the skillet and the coffee-pot. I took fish-lines 
and matches and other things—everything that was worth a 
cent. I cleaned out the place. I wanted an axe, but there 
wasn’t any, only the one out at the wood pile, and I knowed 
why I was going to leave that. I fetched out the gun, and now 
I was done 

I had wore the ground a good deal, crawling out of the hole 
tnd dragging oui so many things. So 1 fixed that as good as 



FREPAItlNO TO START. 


61 


[ coiild from the outside by scattering dust on the place, 
which covered up the smoothness and the sawdust. Then I 
fixed the piece of log back into its place, and put two roche 
under it and one against it to hold it there,—for it was bent 
up at that place, and didn’t quite touch ground. If you stood 
four or five foot away and didn’t know it was sawed, you 
wouldn’t ever notice it; and besides, this was the back of the 



8HOOTINO TUB FIG. 


cabin and it wam’t likely anybody would go fooling around 
there. 

It was all grass clear to the canoe ; so I hadn’t left a track. 
I followed around to see. I stood on the bank and looked out 
over the river. All safe. So I took the gun and went up a 
piece into the woods and was hunting around for some birds, 
when I see a wild pig; hogs soon went wild in them bottoms 



62 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


after they had got away from the prairie farms. I shot this 
fellow and took him into camp. 

I took the axe and smashed in the door. I beat it and 
hacked it considerable, a-doing it. I fetched the pig in and 
took him back nearly to the table and hacked into his throat 
with the axe, and laid him down on the ground to bleed—I say 
ground, because it was ground—hard packed, and no boards. 
Well, next I took an old sack and put a lot of big rocks in it,— 
all I could drag—and I started it from the pig and dragged it to 
the door and through the woods dowu to the river and dumped 
it in, and down it sunk, out of sight. You could easy see that 
something had been dragged over the ground. I did wish Tom 
Sawyer was there, I knowed he would take an interest in this 
kind of business, and throw in the fancy touches. Nobody 
could spread himself like Tom Sawyer in such a thing as that. 

Well, last I pulled out some of my hair, and bloodied the 
axe good, and stuck it on the back side, and slung the axe in the 
comer. Then I took up the pig and held him to my breast with 
my jacket (so he couldn’t drip) till I got a good piece below the 
house and then dumped him into the river. Now I thought of 
something else. So I went and got the bag of meal and my old 
saw out of the canoe and fetched them to the house. I took the 
bag to where it used to stand, and ripped a hole in the bottom 
of it with the saw, for there warn’t no knives and forks on the 
place—pap done everything with his clasp-knife, about the 
cooking. Then I carried the sack about a hundred yards across 
the grass and through the willows east of the house, to a shallow 
lake that was five miles wide and full of rushes—and ducks too, 
you might say, in the season. There was a slough or a creek 
leading out of it on the other side, that went miles away, I 
don’t know where, but it didn’t go to the river. The meal 
sifted out and made a little track all the way to the lake. I 
dropped pap’s whetstone there too, so as to look like it had 



PROXECTINO A PLAN. 


53 


been done by accident. Then I tied up the rip in the meal 
sack with a string, so it wouldn’t leak no more, and took it and 
my saw to the canoe again. 

It was about dark, now; so I dropped the canoe down the 
river under some willows that hung over the bank, and waited 
for the moon to rise. I made fast to a willow ; then I took a 
bite to eat, and by-and-by laid down in the canoe to smoke a 
pipe and lay out a plan. I says to myself, they’ll follow the 
track of that sackful of rocks to the shore and then drag the 
river for me. And they’ll follow that meal track to the lake 
and go browsing down the creek that leads out of it to find the 
robbers that killed me and took the things. They won’t ever 
hunt the.river for anything but my dead carcass. They’ll spon 
get tired of that, and won’t bother no more about me. All 
right; I can stop anywhere 1 want to. Jackson’s Island is good 
enough for me; I know that island pretty well, and nobody 
ever comes there. And then I can paddle over to town, nights, 
and slink around and pick up things I want. Jackson’s Island’s 
the place. 

I was pretty tired, and the first thing I knowed, I was 
asleep. When I woke up I didn’t know where I ^Yas, for a 
minute. I set up and looked around, a little scared. Then I 
remembered. The river looked miles and miles across. The 
moon was so bright I could a counted the drift logs that went 
a slipping along, black and still, hundreds of yards out from 
shore. Everything was dead quiet, and it looked late, and 
smelt late. You know what I mean—I don’t know the word 
to put it in. 

I took a good gap and a stretch, and was just going id un* 
hitch and start, when I heard a sound away over the water. 1 
listened. Pretty soon I made it out. It was that dull kind of 
a regular sound that comes from oars working in rowlocks when 
it’s a still night. I peeped out through the willow branches, 




54 TEE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

and there it was—a skiff, away across the water. I couldn’t 
tell how many was in it. It kept a-coming, and when it was 
abreast of me I see there warii’t but one man in it. Thinks I, 
maybe it’s pap, though I warn’t expecting him. He dropped 
below me, with the current, and by-and-by he come a-swinging 
up shore in the easy water, and he went by so close I could a 
reached out the gun and touched him. Well, it was pap, 
sure enough—and sober, »oo, by the way he laid to his oars. 


TAKING A aiiST. 


I didn’t lose no time. The next minute I was a-spinning 
down stream soft but quick in the shade of the bank. I made 
two mile and a half, and then struck out a quarter of a mile or 
more towards the middle of the river, because pretty soon I 
would be passing the ferry landing and people might see me 
and hail me. I got out amongst the drift-wood and then laid 
doSNu in the hoLlem of the canoe and let her float. I laid there 


























nESTING. 


and bad a good rest and a smoke out of my pipe, looking away 
into the sky, not a cloud in it. The sky looks ever so deep 
when you lay down on your back in the moonshine; I never 
knowed it before. And how far a body can hear on the water 
such nights! I heard people talking at the ferry landing. I 
heard what they said, too, every word of it. One man said it 
was getting towards the long days and the short nights, now. 
T’other one said this wam’t one of the short ones, he reckoned 
—and then they laughed, and he said it over again, and they 
laughed again; then they waked up another fellow and told 
him, and laughed, but he didn’t laugh ; he ripped out some¬ 
thing brisk and said let him alone. The first fellow said he 
’lowed to tell it to his old woman—she would think it was pretty 
good ; but he said that warn’t nothing to some things he had 
said in his time. I heard one man say it was nearly three 
o’clock, and he hoped daylight wouldn’t wait more than about a 
week longer. After that, the talk got further and further away, 
and I couldn’t make out the words any more, but I could hear 
the mumble; and now and then a laugh, too, but it seemed a 
long ways oflf. 

I was away below (he ferry now. I rose up and there was 
/ackson’s Island, about two mile and a half down stream, heavy- 
timbered and standing up out of the middle of the river, big 
an<i dark and solid, like a steamboat without any lights. There 
warn't any signs of the bar at the head—it was all under water 
now. 

It didn’t take me long to get there. I shot past the head 
at a ripping rate, the current was so swift, and then got into 
the dead water and landed on the side towards the Illinois 
shore. I run the canoe into a deep dent in the bank that ] 
knowed about; I had to part the willow branches to get in ; 
and when I made fast nobody could a seen the canoe from the 
outside. 



56 THB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 

I went up and set down on a log at the head of the island 
and looked out on the big river and the black driftwood, and 
away over to the town, three mile away, where there was three 
or four lights twinkling. A monstrous big lumber raft was 
about a mile up stream, coming along down, with a lantern in 
the middle of it, I watched it come creeping down, and when 
it was most abreast of where I stood I heard a man say, “ Stem 
oars, there! heave her head to stabboard I ” I heard that just 
as plain as if the man was by my side. 

There was a-little gray in the sky, now; so I stepped into 
the woods and laid down for a nap before breakfast. 


CHAPTER VIII.

sun was up so high when I 
waked, that I judged it was 
after eight o’clock. I laid 
there in the grass and the cool 
shade, thinking about things 
and feeling rested and ruther 
comfortable and satisBed, I 
could see the sun out at one 
or two holes, but mostly it 
was big trees all about, and 
gloomy in there amongst 
them. There was freckled 
places on the ground where 
the light sifted down through 
the leaves, and the freckled 
places swapped about a little, 
showing there was a little. 
breeze up there. A couple of 
sq libels set on a limb and jabbered at me very friendly. 

I was powerful laay and comfortable—didn’t want to get up 
an cook breakfast. Well, I was dozing oflf again, when 1 
thinks I hears a deep sound of « boom! ” away up the river. I 
rouses up and rests on my elbow and listens; pretty soon I hears 




\U»J' 

IN TBB WOODS. 



58 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


it again. I hopped up and went and looked out at a hole in 
the leaves, and I see a bunch of smoke laying on the water a 
long ways up—about abreast the ferry. And there was the 
ferry-boat full of people, floating along down. I knowed what 
was the matter, now. “ Boom! ” I see the white smoke squirt 
out of the ferry-boat’s side. Vou see, they was firing cannon 
over the water, trying to make my carcass come to the top. 

I was pretty hungry, but it wam’t going to do for me to 
start a fire, because they might see the smoke. So I set there 
and watched the cannon-smoke and listened to the boom. The 
river was a mile wide, there, and it always looks pretty on a 
summer morning—so I was having a good enough time seeing 
them hunt for my remainders, if I only had a bite to eat. 
Well, then I happened to think how they always put quicksilver 
in loaves of bread and float them off because they always go 
right to the drownded carcass and stop there. So says I, I’ll 
keep a look-out, and if any of them’s floating around after me. 
I’ll give them a show. I changed to the Illinois edge of the 
island to see what luck I could have, and I wam’t disappointed. 
A big double loaf come along, and I most got it, with a long 
stick, but my foot slipped and she floated out further. Of 
course I was where the current set in the closest to the shore— 
I knowed enough for that. But by-and-by along comes another 
one, and this time I won. I took out the plug and shook out 
the little dab of quicksilver, and set my teeth in. It was 
“ baker’s bread ”—what the quality eat—none of your low-down 
corn-pone. 

I got a good place amongst the leaves, and set there on a 
log, munching the bread and watching the ferry-boat, and very 
well satisfied. And then something struck me, I says, now I 
reckon the widow or the parson or somebody prayed that this 
bread would find me, and here it has gone and done it. So 
there ain’t no doubt but there is something in that thing. 



VN THE WATCH! 




That is, there’s something in it when a body like the widow or 
the parson prays, but it don’t work for me, and I reckon it 
don’t work for only just the right kind. 

I lit a pipe and had a good long smoke and went on watch¬ 



ing. The ferry-boat was floating with the current, and I allowed 
1 d have a chance to see who was aboaid when she come along, 
because she would come in close, where the bread did. When 
she d got pretty well along down towards me, I put out my pipe 
md went to where I fished out the bread, and laid down behind 




60 


TUB ADVENTUBES OF BUCKLEBERBY FINN. 

a log on the bank in a little open place. Where the log forked 
I could peep through. 

By-and-by she come along, and she drifted in so close that 
they could a run out a plank and walked ashore. Most every¬ 
body was on the boat. Pap, and Judge Thatcher, and Bessie 
Thatcher, and Jo Harper, and Tom Sawyer, and his old Aunt 
1 oily, and Sid and Mary, and plenty more. Everybody was 
talking about the murder, but the captain broke in and says: 

“ Look sharj), now; the current sets in the closest here, and 
maybe he’s washed ashore and got tangled amongst the brush 
at the water’s edge. I hope so, anyway.” 

I didn’t hope so. They all crowded up and leaned over the 
rails, nearly in my face, and kept still, watching with all their 
might. I could see them 6rst-rate, but they couldn’t see me. 
Then the captain sung out: 

“ Stand away ! ” and the cannon let off such a blast right 
before me that it made me deef with the noise and pretty near 
blind with the smoke, and I judged I was gone. If they’d a 
had some bullets in, I reckon they’d a got the corpse they was 
after. Well, I see I wam’t hurt, thanks to goodness. The 
boat floated on and went out of sight around the shoulder of 
the island. I could hear the booming, now and then, further 
and further off, and by-and-by after an hour, I didn’t hear it 
no more. The island was three mile long. I judged they had 
got to the foot, and was giving it up. But they didn’t yet a- 
while. They turned around the foot of the island and started 
up the channel on the Missouri side, under steam, and booming 
once in a while as they went. I crossed over to that side and 
watched them. When they got abreast the head of the island 
they quit shooting and dropped over to the ^lissouri shore and 
went home to the town. 

J knowed I was all right now. Nobody else would come a- 
huuting after me. I got my traps out of the canoe and made 



EXPLORING THE ISLAND. 


ei 


me 


s Dice C3.inp in the thick woods# I nicide 3^ kind of a tent 
out of my blankets to put my things under so the rain couldn’t 
get at them. I catched a cat-fish and haggled him open with 
my saw, and towards sundown I started iny camp fire and had 
supper. Then I set out a line to catch some fish for break¬ 
fast. 

\Vhen it was dark I set by my camp fire smoking, and feel* 
ing pretty satisfied ; but by-and-by it got sort of lonesome, aitd 
so I went and set on the bank and listened to the currents 
washing along, and counted the stars and drift-logs and rafts 
that come down, and then went to bed; there ain’t no better 
way to put in time when you are lonesome ; you can’t stay so, 
you soon get over it. 

And so for three days and nights. No difference—just the 
same thing. But the next day I went exploring around down 
through the island. I was boss of it; it all belonged to me, so 
to say, and I wanted to know all about it; but mainly I wanted 
to put in tbe time. I found plenty strawberries, ripe and 
prime; and green summer-grapes, and green razberries; and 
tbe green blackberries was just beginning to show. They 
would all come bandy by-and-by, I judged. 

Well, I went fooling along in tbe deep woods till I judged 
I wam’t far from the foot of the island. I had my gun along, 
but I hadn’t shot nothing; it was for protection j thought I 
would kill some game nigh home. About this time I mighty 
near stepped on a good-sized snake, and it went sliding off 
through the grass and flowers, and I after it, trying to get a 
shot at it. I clipped along, and all of a sudden I bounded 
right on to the ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking. 

My heart jumped up amongst my lungs. I never waited 
for to look further, but uncocked my gun and went sneaking 
back on my tip-toes as fast as ever I could. Every now and 
then I stopped a second, amongst the thick leaves, and listened; 



62 THE ABVEHTUEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

but my breath come so hard I couldn’t hear nothings else. I 
slunk along another piece further, then listened again; and so 
on, and so on ; if I see a stump, I took it for a man ; if I trod 
on a stick and broke it, it made me feel like a person had cut 
one of my breaths in two and I only got half, and the short 
half, too. 



DISCOVEBINO TUB CAUP PIKB. 


WTien I got to camp I warn’t feeling very brash, there 
warn’t much sand in my craw ; but I says, this ain’t no time to 
be fooling around. So I got all my traps into my canoe again 
80 as to have them out of sight, and I put out the fire and 



A PROFITLESS SLEEP. 


63 


scattered the ashes around to look like an old last year’s camp, 
and then dumb a tree. 

I reckon I was up in the tree two hours ; but I didn’t see 
nothing, I didn’t hear nothing—I only thought I heard and 
seen as much as a thousand things. Well, I couldn’t stay up 
there for ever; so at last I got down, but I kept in the thick 
woods and on the look-out all the time. All I could get to eat 
was berries and what was left over from breakfast. 

By the time it was night I was pretty hungry. So when it 
was good and dark, T slid out from shore before moonrise and 
paddled over to the Illinois bank—about a quarter of a rn'le. I 
went out in the woods and cooked a supper, and I had about 
made up my mind I would stay there all night, when I hear a 
'plmOcety-plunki plunkety-plunk, and says to myself, horses 
coming; and next I hear people’s voices. I got everything 
into the canoe as quick as I could, and then went creeping 
through the woods to see what I could find out. I hadn’t got 
far when I hear a man say: 

“ We better camp here, if we can find a good place; the 
horses is about beat out. Let’s look around,” 




I didn’t wait, but shoved out and paddled away easy, I 
tied up in the old place, and reckoned I would sleep in the canoe. 

I didn’t sleep much. I couldn’t, somehow, for thinking. 
And every time I waked up I thought somebody had me by the 
neck. So the sleep didn’t do me no good. By-and-by I says 
to myself, T can’t live this way; I’m agoing to find out who it 
is that’s here on the island with me; I’ll find it ^ut or bust. 
Well, I felt better, right off. 


So I took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or 
two,, and then let the canoe drop along down amongst the 
shadows. The moon was shining, and outside of the shadows 
it made it most as light as day, I poked along well on to an 
hour, everything still as rocks and sound asleep. Well, by this 



w THE ADVENTXJRES OF irUCKLEnEliRT FINN, 

time I was most down to the foot of the island. A little ripply, 
cool breeze begun to blow, and that was as good as saying the 
night was about done. I give her a turn with the paddle and 
brung her nose to shore ; then I got my gun and slipped out 
and into the edge of the woods. I set down there on a log and 
looked out through the leaves. I seejihe moon go off watch 
and the darkness begin to blanket the river. But in a little 
while I see a pale streak over the tree-tops, and knowed the 
day was coming. So I took my gun and slipped off towards 
where I had run across that camp fire, stopping every minute 
or two to listen. But I hadn’t no luck, somehow; I couldn’t 
seem to find the place. But by-and-by, sure enough, I catehed 
a glimpse of fire, away through the trees. I went for it, cautious 
and slow. By-and-by I was close enough to have a look, and 
there laid a man on the ground. It most give me the fan-tods. 
He had a blanket around his head, and his head was nearly in 
the fire. I set there behind a clump of bushes, in about six 
foot of him, and kept my eyes on him steady. It was getting 
gray daylight, now. Pretty soon he gapped, and stretched 
himself, and hove off the blanket, and it was Miss Watson’s 
Jim! I bet I was glad to see him. I says: 

“ Hello, Jim ! ” and skipped out. 

He bounced up and stared at me wild. Then he drops 
down on his knees, and puts his hands together and says: 

“ Doan’ hurt me—don’t! I hain’t ever done no harm to a 
ghos’. I awluz liked dead people, en done all I could for ’em. 
You go ei^it in de river agin, whah you b’longs, en doan’ do 
nuffn to Ole Jim, ’at ’uz awluz yo’ ffen’.” 

Well, ^ wam’t long making him understand I wam’t dead. 

I wa.s ever so glad to see Jim. I warn’t lonesome, now. I told 
him I wam’t afinid of him telling the people where I was. I 
talked along, but he only set there and looked at me; never 
said nothing. Then I says : 



FINDING JIM. 


65 


“ It’s good daylight. Le’s get breakfast. Make up your 
camp fire good.” 

“ What’s de use er makiu’ up de camp tire to cook sfraw- 
bries en sich truck ? But you got a gun, hain’t you ? Don we 
kin git sumfn’ better den strawbries.” 

“ Strawberries and such truck,” I says. “ Is that what yon 
live on ? ” 



JIM AND THE OHObT. 


edt? 


“I couldn’ git uuffn’ else,” he says. 

“ ^y, W long you been on the island, Jim ? ” 

“ T come heah de night arter you’s killed.” 

“ "^VTiat, all that time ? ” 

Yes-indeedy.” 

•j ^ ^ nothing but that kind of rubbage to 


* No, sah—nuffn’ else,** 


F 




U6 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

“ Well, you must be most starved, ain’t you ? ” 

“ I reck’n I could eat a boss. I think I could. How long 
you ben on de islan’ ? ” 

“ Since the night I got killed.” 

“ No! W’y, what has you lived on ? But you got a gun ? 
Oh, yes, you got a gun. Hat’s good. Now you kill sumfn’ en 
I’ll make up de fire.” 

So we went over to where the canoe was, and while he built 
a fire in a grassy open place amongst the trees, I fetched meal 
and bacon and coffee, and coffee-pot and frying-pan, and sugar 
and tin cups, and the nigger was set back considerable, because 
he reckoned it was all done with witchcraft. I catched a good 
big cat-fish, too, and Jim cleaned him with his knife, and fried 
him. 

When breakfast was ready, we lolled on the grass and eat it 
smoking hot; Jim laid it in with all his might, for he was most 
about starved. Then when we had got pretty well stuffed, we 
laid off and lazied. 

By-and-by Jim says: 

“ But looky here, Huck, who wuz it dat ’uz killed in dat 
shanty, ef it warn’t you ? ” 

Then I told him the whole thing, and he said it was smart. 
He said Tom Sawyer couldn’t get up no better plan than what 
I had. Then I says; 

“ How do you come to be here, Jim, and how’d you get 
here ? ” 

He looked pretty uneasy, and didn’t say nothing for a 
minute. Then he says: 

“ Maybe I better not tell.” 

« Why, Jim ? ” 

“ Well, dey’s reasons. But you wouldn’ tell on me ef I ’uz 
to tell you, would you, Huck? ” 

“ Blamed if I would, Jim.” 



JIM'S ESCAPE. 


®7 

“ Well, I b’lieve you, Huck, I—I run off, 

“Jim!” 

“But mind, you said you wouldn’t tell—you know you said 
you wouldn’t tell, Huck.” 

“ Well, I did. I said I wouldn’t, and I’ll stick to it. Honest 
injun I will. People would call me a low down Ablitionist and 
despise me for keeping mum—but that don t make no diffe¬ 
rence. I ain’t agoing to tell, and I ain’t agoing back there 
anyways. So now, le’s know all about it.” 

“ Well, you see, its ’uz dis way. Ole Missus—dat’s Miss 
Watson—she pecks on me all de time, en treats me pooty rough, 
but she awluz said she wouldn’ sell me down to Orleans. But 
I noticed dey wuz a nigger trader rouu’ de place considable, 
lately, en I begin to git oneasy. Well, one night I creeps to 
de do’, pooty late, en de do* wam’t quite shet, en I hear ole 
missus tell the widder she gwyne to sell me down to Orleans, 
but she didn’ want to, but she could git eight bund’d dollars 
for me, en it ’uz sich a big stack o’ money she couldn’ resis’. 
De widder she try to git her to say she wouldn’ do it, but I 
never waited to hear de res’. I lit out mighty quick, I teU 
you. 

“ I tuck out en shin down de hill en ’spec to steal a skift 
’long de sho’ som’ers ’bove de town, but dey wuz people a- 
stirrin’ yit, so I hid in de ole tumble-down cooper shop on de 
bank to wait for everybody to go ’way. Well, I wuz dah all 
night, Dey wuz somebody roun’ all de time. ’Long ’bout six 
in the mawnin’, skifts b'Cgin to go by, en ’bout eight er nine 
every skift dat went ’long wuz talkin’ ’bout how yo’ pap come 
over to de town en say you’s killed, Dese las* skifts wuz full o’ 
ladies en genlmen agoin* over for to see de place. Sometimes 
deyd pull np at de sho’ en take a res* b’fo* dey started acrost, 
80 by de talk I got to know all ’bout de killin’. 1 ’uz powerful 
sorry you’s killed, Huck, but I ain’t no mo’, now. 



88 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN 

I laid dah under de sbavius all day* I hunorv* but 1 
warn t afeared j bekase I knowed ole misjus en de widder wuz 
goin to 81011. to de camp-meetn* right arter breakfas’ en be 
gone all day, en dey knows I goes o£F wid de cattle ’bout day- 
light, so dey wouldn* ’spec to see me roun’ de place, en so dey 
wouldn’ miss me tell arter dark in de evenin’. De yuther 
servants wouldn’ miss me, kase dey’d shin out en take holiday, 
soon as de ole folks ’uz out’n de way. 

“ Well, when it come dark I tuck out up de river road, en 
went bout two mile er more to whah dey wam’t no houses. I’d 
made up my mine ’bout what I’s agwyne to do. You see ef I 
kep’ on tryin’ to git away afoot, de dogs ’ud track me; ef 1 
stole a skift to cross over, dey’d miss dat skift, you see, en 
dey’d know ’bout whah I’d Ian’ on de yuther side en whah to 
pick up my track. So I says, a raff is what I’s arter; it doan’ 
make no track. 

“ I see a light a-comin’ roun’ de p’int, bymeby, so I wade* in 
sn shove a log ahead o’ me, en swum raore’n half-way acrost de 
river, en got in ’mongst de drift-wood, en kep’ my head down 
low, en kinder swum agin de current tell the raff come along. 
Den I swum to de stern uv it, en tuck aholt. It clouded up 
en ’uz pooty dark for a little while. So I dumb up en laid down 
on de planks. De men ’uz all ’way yonder in de middle, whah 
de lantern wuz. De river wuz arisin’ en dey wuz a good current; 
so I reck’n’d ’at by fo’ in de maimin’ I’d be twenty-five mile 
down de river, en den I’d slip in, jis* b’fo’ daylight, en swim 
asho’ en take to de woods on de Illinoi side. 

“ But I didn’ have no luck. MTien we ’uz mos’ down to de 
head er de islan’, a man begin to come aft wid de lantern. I 
3 ee it warn t no use fer to wait, so I slid overboard, en struck 
>ut fer de islan*. Well, I had a notion I could Ian’ mos* any- 
whers, but 1 couldn t—bank too bluff. I ’uz mos’ to de foot ei 
le islatj b’fo’ I foun’ a good place. I went into de woods e.n 


SIGNS. 


69 


jedged I wouldn’ fool wid raffs no mo’, long as dey move de 
lantern roun’ so. I had my pipe en a plug er dog-leg, en some 
notches in my cap, en dey wam’t wet, so I ’uz all right. 

« And so you ain’t had no meat nor bread to eat all this 

time ? Why didn’t you get mud-turkles ? ” 

“How you gwyne to git’m? You can’t slip up on urn en 
grab um; en how’s a body gwyne to hit um wid a rock ? How 
could a body do it in de night? en I wam’t gwyne to show 

mysef on de bank in de daytime.” 

“ Well, that’s so. You’ve had to keep in the woods all the 
time, of course. Did you hear ’em shooting the cannon ? ” 

“ Oh, yes. I knowed dey was alter you. I see um go by 
heah; watched um thoo de bushes.” 

Some young birds come along, flying a yard or two at a 
time and lighting. Jim said it was a sign it was going to rain. 
He said it was a sign when young chickens flew that way, and 
so he reckoned it was the same way when young birds done it. 

I was going to catch some of them, but Jim wouldn’t let me. 
He said it was death. He said bis father lay mighty sick once, 
and some of them catched a bird, and his old granny said his 
father would die, and he did. 

And Jim said you musn’t count the things you are going to 
cook for dinner, because that would bring bad luck. The same 
if you shook the tablecloth after sundown. And he said if a 
man owned a bee-hive, and that man died, the bees must be 
told about it before sun-up next morning, or else the bees 
would all weaken down and quit work and die. Jim said bees 
wouldn’t yting idiots; but I didn’t believe that, because I had 
tried them lots of tunes myself, and they wouldn’t sting 
me. 

I had heard about some of these things before, but not all 
of them. Jim knowed all kinds of signs. He said he knowed 
most everything. I said it looked to me like all the signs was 


70 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


about bad luck, and so I asked him if there wam’t any good- 
luck signs. He says: 

“ Mighty few—an* dey ain’ no use to a body. What you 
want to know when good luck’s a-comin’ for ? want to keep it 
off?” And he said; “ Ef you’s got hairy arms en a hairy 
breas’, it’s a sign dat you’s agwyne to be rich. Well, dey’s 
some use in a sign like dat, ’kase it’s so fur ahead. You see, 
maybe you’s got to be po* a long time fust, en so you might git 
discourage’ en kill yo’self ’f you didn’ know by de sign dat you 
gwyne to be rich bymeby.” 

“ Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast, Jim ? ” 

“ What’s de use to axe dat question ? don’ you see I has ? ” 
“ Well, are you rich ? ” 


“ No, but I been rich wunst, and gwyne to be rich agin. 
Wunst I had foteen dollars, but I tuck to speculat’n’, en got 
busted out.” 

“ What did you speculate in, Jim ? ” 

“ Well, fust I tackled stock ? ” 

“ What kind of stock ? ” 

“ Why, live stock. Cattle, you know. I put ten dollars in 
a cow. But I ain’ gwyne to resk no mo’ money in stock. De 
cow up ’n’ died on my ban’s.” 

“ So you lost the ten dollars.” 

“ No, I didn’ lose it all. I on’y los’ ’bout nine of it. I sole 
de hide en taller for a dollar en ten cents.” 

“ You had five dollars and ten cents left. Did you speculate 
any more ? ” 

“ Yes. You know dat one-laigged nigger dat b’longs to old 
Misto Bradish? well, he sot up a bank, en say anybody dat put 
in a dollar would git fo’ dollars mo’ at de en’ er de year. 
Well, all de niggers went in, but dey didn’ have much. I wu2 
de on’y one dat had much. So I s^uck out for mo’ dan fo* 
dollars, en I said ’f I didn’ git it I’d start a bank mysef. Well 



**J)AT ONE-LAIQQED NIGOER.’' 


n 


0* course dat nigger want’ to keep me out er de business, 
bekase he say dey wam’t business ’nough for two banks, so he 
* say I could put in my five dollars en he pay me thirty-five at de 

en’ er de year. _ 

«So I done it. Den I reck’n’d I’d inves’ de thirty-five 



MISTO BRIDISH’B KIOGBB. 


dollars right off en keep things a-movin*. Dey wuz a nigger 
name’ Bob, dat had ketched a wood-flat, en his marster didn’ 
know it; en I bought it ofPn him en told him to take de 
thirty-five dollars when de en’ er de year come; but some¬ 
body stole de wood-flat dat night, en nex’ day de one-laigged 



72 TSE ADVENTTJKES OF RUCKLEBERItY FINI7, 


nigger saj de bank ’a busted. So dey didn’ none uv us git no 
money.” 

“ What did you do with the ten cents, Jim ? ” 

“ Well, I uz gwyne to spen’ it, but I had a dream, en de 
dream tole me to give it to a nigger name’ Balum—Balum’s 
Ass dey call him for short, he’s one er dem chuckle-heads, you 
know. But he’s lucky, dey say, eu I see I wam’t lucky. De 
dream say let Balum inves’ de ten cents en he’d make a raise 


for me. W ell, Balum he tuck de money, en when he wuz in 
church he hear de preacher say dat whoever give to de po’ len’ 
to de Lord, en boun’ to git his money back a bund’d times. 
So Balum he tuck en give de ten cents to de po’, en laid low to 
see what wuz gwyne to come of it.” 

“ Well, what did come of it, Jim P ” 

ISuffn never come of it. I couldn’ manage to k’leck dat 
money no way; en Balum he couldn’. I ain’t gwyne to len’ no 
mo’ money ’dout I see de security. Boun’ to git yo’ money 
back a bund’d times, de preacher says! Ef I could git de ten 
c&at 8 back, I’d call it squab, en be glad er de chanst.” 

^^ell, it’s all right, anyway, Jim, long as you’re going to 
be rich again some time or other.” 

“ Yes en I’s rich now, come to look at it. I owns mysef, 
en I s wuth eight bund’d dollars, I wisht I had de money, I 
wouldn’ want no mo’,” 




IXPLOBINO TBE 0A7B. 

CHAPTER IX.

WANTED to go and 
look at a place right 
about the middle of 
the island, that I’d 
found when I was 
exploring ; so we 
started, and soon got 
to it, because the 
island was only three 
miles long and a 
quarter of a mile 
wide. 

This place was a 
tolerable long steep 
hill or ridge, about 
forty foot high. We 
had a rough time 
getting to the top, 
the sides was so steep 
and the bushes so 
thick. We tramped 
and dumb around all 


over it, and by-and-by found a good big cavern in the rock, 
most up to the top on the side towards Illinois. The cavern 



74 THB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

was as big as two or three rooms bunched together, and Jim 
could stand up straight in it. It was cool in there. Jim was 
for putting our traps in there, right away, but I said we didn’t 
want to be climbing up and down there all the time. 

Jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place, and had 
all the traps in the cavern, we could rush there if anybody 
was to come to the island, and they would never find us with¬ 
out dogs. And besides, he said them little birds had said it 
was going to rain, and did I want the things to get wet? 

So we went back and got the canoe and paddled up abreast 
the cavern, and lugged all the traps up there. Then we hunted 
up a place close by to hide the canoe in, amongst the thick 
willows. We took some fish oflF of the lines and set them again, 
and begun to get ready for dinner. 

The door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead 
in, and on ope side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit 
and was flat and a good place to build a fire on. So we built it 
there and cooked dinner. 

We spread the blankets inside for a carpet, and eat our 
dinner in there. We put all the other things handy at the 
back of the cavern. Pretty soon it darkened up and begun to 
thunder and lighten; so the birds was right about it. Directly 
it begun to rain, and it rained like all fury, too, and I never 
see the wind blow so. It was one of these regular summer 
storms. It would get so dark that it looked all blue-black out^ 
side, and lovely j and the rain would thrash along by so thick 
that the trees off a little ways looked dim and spider-webby} 
and here would come a blast of wind that would bend the trees 
down and turn up the pale underside of the leaves; and then a 
perfect ripper of a gust would follow along and set the branches 
to tossing their arms as if they was just wild; and next, when 
it was just about the bluest and blackest— fst! it was as bright 
as glory and you’d have a little glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging 



TJIB CATE. 


76 


about, aTPay off yonder in the storm, hundreds of yards further 
than you could see before; dark as sin again in a second, and 
now you’d hear the thunder let go with an awful crash and then 
go rumbling, grumbling, tumbling down the sky towards the 
under side of the world, like rolling empty barrels downstairs, 
where it’s long stairs and they bounce a good deal, you know. 

“Jim, this is nice,” I says. “I wouldn’t want to be no- 



IN THE OAVB. 


where else but here. Pass me along another hunk of fish and 
some hot corn-bread.” 

“ WeU, you wouldn’t a ben here, ’f it hadn’t a ben for Jim. 
\ ou’d a ben down dah in de woods widout any dinner, en gittin’ 
mos’ drownded, too, dat you would, honey. Chickens knows 
when Its gwyne to rain, en so do de birds, chile.” 

The river went on mining and raising for ten or twelve days, 









76 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


till at last it was over the banks. The water was three or four 
foot deep on the island in the low places and on the Illinois 
bottom. On that side it was a good many miles wide; but on 
the Missouri side it was the same old distance across—a half 
a mile—because the Missouri shore was just a wall of high 
blufifs. 

Daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe. It 
-was mighty cool and shady in the deep woods even if the sun 
was blazing outside. We went winding in and out amongst the 
trees; and sometimes the vines hung so thick we had to back 
away and go some other way. Well, on every old broken-down 
tree you could see rabbits, and snakes, and such things; and 
when the island had been overflowed a day or two, they got so 
tame, on account of being hungry, that you could paddle right 
up and put your hand on them if you wanted to; but not the 
snakes and turtles—they would slide off in the water. The 
ridge our cavern was in was full of them. We could a had pets 
enough if we’d wanted them. 

One night we catched a little section of a lumber raft—nice 
pine planks. It was twelve foot wide and about fifteen or six¬ 
teen foot long, and the top stood above water six or seven 
inches, a solid level floor. We could see saw-logs go by in the 
daylight, sometimes, but we let them go; we didn’t show our¬ 
selves in daylight. 

Another night, when we was up at the head of the island, 
just before daylight, here comes a frame house down, on the 
west side. She was a two-storey, and tilted over, considerable. 
We paddled out and got aboard—dumb in at an upstairs win¬ 
dow. But it was too dark to see yet, so we made the canoe 
fast and set in her to wait for daylight. 

The light begun to come before we got to the foot of the 
island. Then we looked in at the window. We could make 
out a bed, and a table, and two old chairs, and lots of things 



TJIE FLOATING HOUSE. 


77 


around about on the floor ; and there was clothes hanging against 
the wall. There was something laying on the floor in the far 
comer that looked like a man. So Jim says : 

“Hello, you! ” 

But it didn’t budge. So I hollered again, and then Jim 
says: 

“ De man ain’t asleep—he’s dead. \ou hold still 111 go 
en see,” 



JIM SEB8 A DEAD MAN. 


He went and bent down and looked, and says: 

“It’s a dead man. Yes, indeedy ; naked, too. He’s ben 
shot in de back. I reck’n he’s ben dead two er three days. 
Come in, Huck, but doan* look at his face—it’s too gashly.” 

I didn’t look at him at all. Jim tbrowed some old rags over 
him, but he needn’t done it; I didn’t want to see him. There 









78 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


was heaps of old greasy cards scattered around over the floor, 
and old whisky bottles, and a couple of masks made out of black 
cloth; and all over the walls was the ignorantest kind of words and 
pictures, made with charcoal. There was two old dirty calico 
dresses, and a sun-bonnet, and some women’s under-clothes, hang- 
ing against the wall, and some men’s clothing, too. We put the 
lot into the canoe; it might come good. There was a boy’s 
old speckled straw hat on the floor; I took that too. And 
there was a bottle that had had milk in it; and it had a rag 
stopper for a baby to suck. We would a took the bottle, but 
it was broke. There was a seedy old chest, and an old hair 
trunk with the hinges broke. They stood open, but there 
wam’t nothing left in them that was any account. The way 
things was scattered about, we reckoned the people left in a 
hurry and wam’t fixed so as to carry off most of their stuff. 

We got an old tin lantern, and a butcher knife without any 
handle, and a bran-new Barlow knife worth two bits in any 
store, and a lot of tallow candles, and a tin candlestick, and a 
gourd, and a tin cup, and a ratty old bed-quilt off the bed, and 
a reticule with needles and pins and beeswax and buttons and 
thread and all such truck in it, and a hatchet and some nails, 
and a fish-line as thick as my little finger, with some monstrous 
hooks on it, and a roll of buckskin, and a leather dog-collar, 
and a horse-shoe, and some vials of medicine that didn’t have 
no label on them ; and just as we was leaving I found a toler¬ 
able good curry-comb, and Jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow, 
and a wooden leg. The straps was broke off of it, but barring 
that, it was a good enough leg, though it was too long for me 
and not long enough for Jim, and we couldn’t find the other 
one, though we hunted all around. 

And so, take it all around, we made a good haul. When 
we was ready to shove off, we was a quarter of a mile below the 
island, and it was pretty broad day; so I made Jim lay down 



A GOOD HAUL. 


79 


in the canoe and cover up with the quilt, because if he set up, 
people could tell he was a nigger a good ways off. I paddled 
over to the Illinois shore, and drifted down most a half a mile 
doing it. I crept up the dead water under the bank, and 
hadn’t no accidents and didn’t see nobody. We got home all 
safe. 



> r 




V w 

} \ 




CHAPTER X.


ii'li 

A breakfast I wanted 

-^A- to talk about the dead 

Wf]!l wf guess out how 

ISf 'V Ihe come to be killed, but 

didn’t want to. He 
would fetch bad 

might come and 

^ 1 vIH ha’nt us; he said a man 
I® warn’t buried was 

gi !®U^i I f vS ■ more likely to go a-ha’nt- 

^flF ing around than one that 

^mi/T ?' planted and com- 

hi-'I'/vf M 'v- ^ pretty reasonable, so I 

didn’t say no more ; but 

‘^if)'*''^'' ' 'f j’studying over it and 

wishing I knowed who 

THEY VOUKD EIGHT D0LLAB3. 

they done it for. 

We rummaged the clothes we’d got, and found eight dollars 
in silver sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat. 
Jim said he reckoned the people in that house stole the coat, 


<■ ’T ' 




yM 






(m/zA 


m 


'fMmimM 








mm 


VA 


■"I/' 


vr/// 






»''iijj \I 

I • Ul 






THBY POUND BIGHT DOLLAES. 



THE FIND. 


81 


because if they’d a kuowed the money was there they wouldn’t 
II left it. I said I reckoned they killed him, too; but Jim 
didn’t want to talk about that. I.says: 

“ Now you think it’s bad luck; but what did you say when 
I fetched in the snake-skin that I found on the top of the ridge 
day before yesterday? You said it was the worst bad luck in 
the world to touch a snake-skin \7ith my hands. Well, here’s 
your bad luck! We’ve raked in all this truck and eight dollars 
besides. I wish we could have some bad luck like this every 
day, Jim.” 

“ Never you mind, honey, never you mind. Don’t you git 
too peart. It’s a-comin’. Mind I tell you, it’s a-coinin’.” 

It did come, too. It was a Tuesday that we had that talk. 
Well, after dinner Friday, we was laying around in the grass at 
the upper end of the ridge, and got out of tobacco. I went to 
the cavern to get some, and found a rattlesnake in there. I 
killed him, and curled him up on the foot of Jim’s blanket, 
ever so natural, thinking there’d be some fun when Jim found 
him there. Well, by night I forgot all about the snake, and 
when Jim Hung himself down on the blanket while I struck a 
light, the snake’s mate was there, and bit him. 

He jumped up yelling, and the first thing the light showed 
was the varmint curled up and ready for another spring. I 
laid him out in a second with a stick, and Jim grabbed pap’s 
whisky jug and begun to pour it down. 

He was barefooted, and the snake bit him right on the 
heel. That all comes of my being such a fool as to nob re¬ 
member that wherever you leave a dead snake its mate always 
comes there and curls around it. Jim told me to chop off the 
snake’s head and throw it away, and then skin the body and 
roast a piece of it. I done it, and he eat it and said it would 
help cure him. He made me take off the rattles and tie them 
around his wrist, too. He said that that would help. Then I 

o 



83 


THE ABEEyTURES OF HUCKLEBEliTiY FINN. 


slid cut quiet and throwed the snakes clear away amongst the 
busl es; for I warn’t going to let Jim find out it was all my 
fault, not if I could help it. 



JIM AND TUB eNARa 


Jim sucked and sucked at the jug, and now and then be 
got out of his head and pitched around and yelled ; but every 
time he come to himself he went to sucking at the jug again. 
His foot swelled up pretty big, and so did his leg ; but by-and- 




83 


OLD HANK BUNKER. 

by the drunk begun to come, and so I judged he was aU right; 
bub rd druther been bit with a snake than pap’s whisky. 

Jim was laid up for four days and nights. Then the swell¬ 
ing was all gone and he was around again. I made up my 
mind I wouldn't ever take aholt of a snake-skin again with my 



OLU HANS BUKRBR. 


hands, now that I see what had come of it. Jim said he reckoned 
I would believe him next time. And he said that handling a 
snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we hadn’t got 
to the end of it yet. He said he druther see the new moon 
over his left shoulder as much as a thousand times than take 
up a snake-skin in his band. Well, I was getting to feel that 

9 % 



64 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 


way myself, though I’ve always reckoned that looking at the 
new moon over your left shoulder is one of the carelessest and 
foolishest things a body can do. Old Hank Bunker done it 
once, and bragged about it; and in less than two years he got 
drunk and fell ofif of the shot tower and spread himself out so 
that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and they 
slid him edgeways between two bam doors for a coffin, and 
buried him so, so they say, but I didn’t see it Pap told me. 
But anyway, it all come of looking at the moon that way, like 
a fool. 

Well, the days went along, and the river went down be¬ 
tween its banks again ; and about the first thing we done was 
to bait one of the big hooks with a skinned rabbit and set it 
and catch a cat-fish that was as big as a man, being six foot 
two inches long, and weighed over two hundred pounds. We 
couldn’t handle him, of course; he would a flung us into Illinois. 
We just set there and watched him rip and tear around till he 
drownded. We found a brass button in his stomach, and a 
round ball, and lots of rubbage. We split the ball open with 
the hatchet, and there was a spool in it. Jim said he’d had it 
there a long time, to coat it over so and make a ball of it. It 
was as big a fish as was ever catched in the Mississippi, I 
reckon. Jim said he hadn’t ever seen a bigger one. He would 
a been worth a good deal over at the village. They peddle 
out such a fish as that by the pound in the market house 
there; everybody buys some of him; his meat’s as white as 
snow and makes a good fry. 

Next morning I said it was getting slow and dull, and I 
wanted to get a stirring up, some way. I said I reckoned I 
would slip over the river and find out what was going on. 
Jim liked that notion; but he said I must go in the dark and 
look sharp. Then he studied it over and said. Couldn’t I put 
on some of them old things and dress up like a girl ? That 



IN DISGUISE. 


85 


was a goo(i notion, too. So we shortened up one of the calico 
gowns aud 1 turned up my trowser-legs to my knees and got 
into it. Jim hitched it behind with the hooka, and it was a 
fair fit. I put on the sun-bonnet and tied it under my chin, 
and then for a body to look in and see my face was like looking 
down a joint of stove-pipe. Jim said nobody would know me, 
even in the daytime, hardly. I practised around all day to get 



••a kai» nr." 

the hang of the things, and by-and-by I could do pretty well 
in them, only Jim said I didn’t walk like a girl; and he said I 
must quit pulling up my gown to get at my britches pocket, 
I took notice, and done better. 

I started up the Elinois shore in the canoe just after dark, 

I started across to the town from a little below the ferry 
la74ding, and the drift of the current fetched me in at the 















86 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


bottom of the town. I tied up and started along the bank 
There was a light burning in a little shantj that hadn’t been 
lived in for a long time, and I wondered who had took up 
quarters there. I slipped up and peeped in at the window. 
There was a woman about forty year old in there, knitting by 
a candle that was on a pine table. I didn’t know her face; 
she was a stranger, for you couldn’t start a face in that town 
that I didn’t know. Now this was lucky, because I was weaken¬ 
ing ; I was getting afraid I had come; people might know my 
voice and find me out. But if this woman had been in such a 
little town two days she could tell me all I wanted to know; 
so I knocked at the door, and made up my mind I wouldn’t 
forget I was a girl. 



CHAPTER XI. 




,, snys 


the 

did. 


OME in 

woman, and I 
She says: 

“ Take a cheer.” 

I done it. She 
looked me all over with 
her little shiny eyes, 
and «ays: 

“ What might your 
name be ? ” 

» Sarah Williams.” 

“ Where ’bouts do 
you live? In this neigh¬ 
bourhood ? ” 

“ No’m. In Hoo- 
kerville, seven mile be¬ 
low. I’ve walked all 
the way, and I’m all 
tired out.” 

Hungry, too, I reckon. I’ll find you something.” 

No’m, I ain’t hungry. I was so hungry I had to stop two 
mile below here at a farm; so I ain’t hungry no more. It’s 
what makes me so late. My mother’s down sick, and out of 
money and everything, and I come to tell my uncle Abner 
Moore. He Uvea at the upper end of the town, she says. I 
bitin’t ever been here before. Do you know him ? ” 


"rOUB IN." 


a 


ii 



88 


THE AEYENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINK. 

“No; but I don’t know everybody yet. I haven’t lived 
here quite two weeks. It’s a considerable ways to the upper 

end of the town. You better stay here all night. Take off 
your bonnet.” 

“ No, I says, “ I’ll rest awhile, I reckon, and go on. I 
ain’t afeard of the dark.” 

She said she wouldn’t let me go by myself, but her husband 
would be in by-and-by, maybe in a hour and a half, and she’d 
send him along with me. Then she got to talking about her 
husband, and about her relations up the river, and her relations 
down the river, and about how much better off they used to 
was, and how they didn’t know but they’d made a mistake 
coming to our town, instead of letting well alone—and so on 
and so on, till I was afeard I had made a mistake coming to 
her to find out what was going on in the town; but by-and-by 
she dropped on to pap and the murder, and then I was pretty 
willing to let her clatter right along. She told about me and 
Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand dollars (only she got it 
ten) and all about pap and what a hard lot he was, and what a 
hard lot I was, and at last she got down to where I was murdered, 
I says: 

“Who done it? We’ve heard considerable about these 
goings on, down in Hookerville, but we don’t know who’twas 
that killed Huck Finn.” 

M ell, I reckon there’s a right smart chance of people 
h&T€ thatd like to know who killed him. Some thinks old 
Finn done it himself.” 

“No—-is that so ? ” 

“:\lost everybody thought it at first. He’ll never know how 
nigh he come to getting lynched. But before night they 
changed around and judged it was done by a runaway nigger 
named Jim.” 



'RUCK AND THE WOMAN. 




I Btoppod. I reckoned I better keep still. She run on, 
and never noticed I had put in at all. 

“ The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed. 
So there’s a reward out for him—three hundred dollars. And 
there’s a reward out for old Finn too—two hundred dollars. 
You see, he come to town the morning after the murder, and 
told about it, and was out with ’em on the ferry-boat hunt, and 
right away after he up and left. Before night they wanted to 
lynch him, but he was gone, you see. Well, next day they 
found out the nigger was gone; they found out he hadn’t ben seen 
senee ten o’clock the night the murder was done. So then 
they put it on him, you see, and while they was full of it, next 
day back comes old Finn and went boo-booing to Judge 
Thatcher to get money to hunt for the nigger all over Illinois 
with. The judge give him some, and that evening he got 
drunk and was around till after midnight with a couple of 
mighty hard looking strangers, and then went off with them. 
Well, he hain’t come back sence, and they ain’t looking for him 
hack till this thing blows over a little, for people thinks now 
that he killed bis boy and fixed things so folks would think 
robbers done it, and then he’d get Huck’s money without having 
to bother a long time with a lawsuit. People do say he wara’t 
any too good to do it. Oh, he’s sly, I reckon. If he don’t 
come back for a year, he’ll be all right. You can’t prove anv- 
thiug on him, you know; everything will be quieted down 
then, and he 11 walk into Huck’s money as easy as nothing,” 
Yes, I reckon so, ’m, I don’t see nothing in the way of 
it. Has everybody quit thinking the nigger done it ? ” 

Ohj^no, not everybody. A good many thinks he done it, 

ut they 11 get the nigger pretty soon, now, and maybe they 
«an scare it out of him.” 

“ Why, are they after him yet ? ” 

^ell, you re innocent, ain’t you! Does three hundred 



90 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


dollars laj round every day for people to pick up? Some folks 
thinks the nigger ain’t far from here. I’m one of them—but I 
hain’t talked it around. A few days ago I was talking with an 
old couple that lives next door in the log shanty, and they 
happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to that island over 
yonder that they call Jackson’s Island. Don’t anybody live 
there? says I. No, nobody, says they. I didn’t say any more, 
but I done some thinking, I was pretty near certain I’d seen 
smoke over there, about the head of the island, a day or two 
before that, so I says to myself, like as not that nigger’s hiding 
over there; anyway, says I, ’t’s worth the trouble to give the 
place a hunt. I hain’t seen any smoke sence, so I reckon 
maybe he’s gone, if it was him; but husband’s going over to 
see—him and another man. He was gone up the river; but 
he got back to-day and I told him as soon as he got here two 
hours ago.” 

I had got so uneasy I couldn’t set still. I had to do some¬ 
thing with my hands; so I took up a needle off of the table 
and went to threading it. My hands shook, and I was making 
a bad job of it. When the woman stopped talking, I looked 
up, and she was looking at me pretty curious, and smiling a 
little. I put down the needle and thread and let on to be in¬ 
terested—and I was, too—and says: 

“ Three hundred dollars is a power of money. I wish my 
mother could get it. Is your husband going over there to¬ 
night ? ” 

“ Oh, yes. He went up town with the man I was telling 
you of, to get a boat and see if they could borrow another gun. 
They’ll go over after midnight.” 

“ Couldn’t they see better if they was to wait till day¬ 
time?” 

“Yes. And couldn’t the nigger see better, too? After 
midnight he’ll likely be asleep, and they can slip around through 



TUB 8SABC3 


91 


the woods and hunt up hia camp fire all the better for the dark, 
if he’s got one.” 

“ I didn’t think of that.” 

The woman kept looking at me pretty curious, and I didn t 
feel a bit comfortable. Pretty soon she says; 

“ What did you say your name was, honey ? ” 





“HIM AKD AHOTHSB MAS.** 

"11—^Mary Williams,” 

Somehow it didn’t seem to me that I said it was ITary 
before, so I didn’t look up; seemed to me I said it was Sarah; 
BO I felt sort of cornered, and was afeared maybe 1 was looking 
it, too, I wished the woman would say something more; the 
longer she' set still, the nneasier I was. But now she says : 




92 


THE ADVEyrURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 


“ Honey, I thought you said it Ts-as Sarah when you first 
come in ? ” 

“ Oh, yes’m, I did. Sarah Mary Williams, Sarah’s my first 
name. Some calls me Sarah, some calls me Mary,” 

“Oh, that’s the way of it?” 

“ Yes’m.” 

I was feeling better, then, but I wished I was out of there, 
anyway, I couldn’t look up yet. 

Well, the woman fell to talking about how hard times was, 
and how poor they had to live, and how the rats was as free as 
if they owned the place, and so forth, and so on, and then I got 
easy again. She was right about the rats. You’d see one stick 
his nose out of a hole in the comer every little while. She said 
she had to have things handy to throw at them when she was 
alone, or they wouldn’t give her no peace. She showed me a 
bar of lead, twisted up into a knot, and said she was a good shot 
with it generly, but she’d wrenched her arm a day or two ago, 
and didn’t know whether .she could throw tnie, now. But she 
watched for a chance, and directly she banged away at a rat, 
but she missed him wide, and said “ Ouch !” it hurt her arm so. 
Then she told me to try for the next one. I wanted to be 
getting away before the old man got back, but of course I 
didn’t let on. I got the thing, and the first rat that showed 
his nose I let drive, and if he’d a stayed where he was he’d a 
been a tolerable sick rat. She said that that was first-rate, and 
she reckoned I would hive the next one. She went and got 
the lump of lead and fetched it back and brought along a hank 
of yam, which she wanted me to help her with. I held up my 
two bands and she put the hank over them and went on 
talking about her and her husband’s matters. But she broke 
off' to say: 

“ Keep your eye on the rats. You better have the lead in 
your lap, handy.” 



TRE VARICA TION. 


9a 


So she dropped the lump into my lap, just at that moment, 
and I clapped my legs together on it and she went on talking. 
But only about a minute. Then she took off the hank and 
looked me straight in the face, but very pleasant, and says: 

“ Come, now—what’s your real name ? ” 

“ M^h-what, mum ? ” 

“WHiat’s your real name? Is it Bill, or Tom, or Bob ?—or 
what is it ? ” 

I recKon I shook like a leaf, and I didn’t know hardly what 
to do. But I says: 

“ Please to don’t poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum. If 
I’m in the way, here, I’ll-” 


“ No, you won’t. Set down and stay where you are, I ain’t 
going to hurt you, and I ain’t going to tell on you, nuther. 
You just tell me your secret, and trust me. I’ll keep it; and 
what’s more, I’ll help you. So’ll my old man, if you want him 
to. You see, you’re a runaway ’prentice—that’s all. It ain’t 
anjrthing. There ain’t any harm in it. You’ve been treated 


bad, and you made up your mind to cut. Bless you, child, I 

wouldn’t tell on you. TeU me all about it, now —that’s a good 
boy.” 


So I said it wouldn’t be no use to try to play it any longer, 
and I would just make a clean breast and tell her everything, 
but she mustn’t go back on her promise. Then I told her my 
father and mother was dead, and the law had bound me out to 
mean old fanner in the country thirty mile back from the 
nver, and he treated me so bad I couldn’t stand it no longer; 

e went away to be gone a couple of days, and so I took my 
c ce and stole some of his daughter’s old clothes, and cleared 
^,^dl had been three nights coiiii«»,the thirty miles; I 
hr and hid day-times and slept, and the bag of 

I haH ^ I earned from home lasted me all the way and 
a p enty, I said I believed my uncle Abner Moore would 



94 


THE AjyVEHTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIFK. 


take care of me, and so that was why I struck out for this town 
of Goshen. 

“ Goshen, child ? This ain’t Goshen. This is St. Peters¬ 
burg. Goshen’s ten mile further up the river. Who told you 
this was Goshen ’ 



SHE PUTS UP ▲ SNACK. 


“ why, a man I met at day-break this morning, just as I 
was going to turn into the woods for my regular sleep. He 
told me when the roads forked I must take the right hand, and 
five mile would fetch me to Goshen.” 

“ He was drunk I reckon. He told you just exactly wrong/ 



GOING TO GOSHEN. 


96 


“Well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain’t no matter 
now. I got to be moving along. I’ll fetch Goshen before day¬ 
light.” 

“Hold on a minute. I’ll put you up a snack to eat. You 
might want it.” 

So she put me up a snack, and says: 

« gay—when a cow’s laying down, which end of her gets up 
6rst? Answer up prompt, now—don’t stop to study over it. 
Which end gets up first ? ” 

“The hind end, mum.” 

“ Well, then, a horse ? ” 

“The for’rard end, mum.” 

“ Which side of a tree does the most moss grow on ? ” 

“North side.” 

“ If fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside, how many of them 
eats with their heads pointed the same direction ? ” 

“ The whole fifteen, mum,” 

“ Well, I reckon you have lived in the country, I thought 
maybe you was trying to hocus me again. W^hat’s your real 
name, now ? ” 

“ George Peters, mum.” 

“ \Vell, try to remember it, George. Don’t forget and tell 
me it s Elezander before you go, and then get out by saying it’s 
George-Elexander when I catch you. And don’t go about 
women in that old calico. You do a girl tolerable poor, but 
you might fool men, maybe. Bless you, child, when you set 
out to thread a needle, don’t hold the thread still and fetch the 
needle up to it; hold the needle still and poke the thread at 
it that3 the way a woman most always does; but a man 
a ways does t other way. And when you throw at a rat or any- 
t ing, hitch yourself up a tip-toe, and fetch your hand up over 
your head as awkard as you can, and miss your rat about six or 
seven foot. Throw stiff-armed from the shoulder, Uke there 


96 


THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 


was a pivot there for it to turn on—like a girl; not from the 
wrist and elbow, ^vith your arm out to one side, like a boy. 
And mind you, when a girl tries to catch anything in her lap, 
she throws her knees apart j she don’t clap them together, the 
way you did when you catched the lump of lead. XNTiy, I 
spotted you for a boy when you was threading the needle; and 

I contrived the other things just to make certain. Now trot 

• 

along to your uncle, Sarah Mary Williams George Elexander 
Peters, and if you get into trouble you send word to Mrs. 
Judith Loftus, which is me, and I’ll do what I can to get you 
out of it. Keep the river road, all the way, and next time you 
tramp, take shoes and socks with you. The river road’s a rocky 
one, and your feet’ll be in a condition when you get to Goshen, 
I reckon.” 

I went up the bank about fifty yards, and then I doubled 
on my tracks and slipped back to where my canoe was, a good 
piece below the house. I jumijed in and was off in a hurry. 
I went up stream far enough to make the head of the island, 
and then started across. I took off the sun-bonnet, for I didn’t 
want no blinders on, then. When I was about the middle, I 
hear the clock begin to strike; so I stops and listens; the 
sound come faint over the water, but clear—eleven. When t 
struck the head of the island 1 never waited to blow, though I 
was most winded, but I shoved right into the timber where my 
old camp used to be, and started a good fire there on a high- 
and-dry s])ot. 

Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place a 
mile and a half below, as hard as I could go. I landed, and 
slopped through the timber and up the ridge and into the 
cavern. There Jim laid, sound asleep on the ground. I roused 
him out and says: 

“ Git up and hump yourself, Jim I There ain’t a minute to 
lose. They’re after us 1 ” 



*> TEETHE after VS!" 


97 


Jim never asked no questions, he never said a word; but 
the way he worked for the next half an hour showed about how 
he was scared. By that time everything we had in the world 
was on our raft and she was ready to be shoved out from the 
willow cove where she was hid. We put out the camp fire at 
the cavern the first thing, and didn’t show a candle outside 
after that. 

I took the canoe out from shore a little piece and took a 
look, but if there was a boat around I couldn’t see it, for stars 
and shadows ain’t good to see by. Then we got out the raft 
and slipped along down in the shade, past the foot of the island 
dead still, never saying a word. 



H 







9 



ON THE RAKT. 

CHAPTER XII.


a been close on to one 
o’clock when we got below the 
island at last, and the raft did 
seem to go mighty slow. If a 
boat was to come along, we was 
going to take to the canoe and 
break for the Illinois shore; and 
it was well a boat didn’t come, 
for we hadn’t ever thought to 
put the gun into the canoe, or 
a fishing-line or anything to 
eat. We was in ruther too 
much of a sweat to think of so 
many things. It warn’t good 
judgment to put everything on 
the raft. 

If the men went to the 
island, I just expect they found 
the camp fire I built, and watched it all night for Jim to come. 
Anyways, they stayed away from us, and if my building the fire 
never fooled them it warn't no fault of mine. I played it as 
low-down on them as I could. 

When the first streak of day begun to show, we tied up to 
a tow-head in a big bend on the Illinois side, and hacked ofl 





SLOW NAVJOATION. 


99 


cotton-wood branches with the hatchet and covered up the raft 
with them so she looked like there had been a cave-in in the 
bank there. A tow-head is a sand-bar that has cotton-woods 
on it as thick as harrow-teeth. 

We had mountains on the Missouri shore and heavy timber 
on the Illinois side, and the channel was down the Missouri 
shore at that place, so we warn’t afraid of anybody running 
across us. We laid there all day and watched the rafts and 
steamboats spin down the Missouri shore, and up-bound steam¬ 
boats fight the big river in the middle. I told Jim all about 
the time I had jabbering with that woman ; and Jim said she 
was a smart one, and if she was to start after us herself she 
wouldn’t set down and watch a camp fire—no, sir, she’d fetch 
a dog. Well, then, I said, why couldn’t she tell her husband 
to fetch a dog? Jim said he bet she did think of it by the 
time the men was ready to start, and be believed they must a 
gone up town to get a dog, and so they lost all that time, or 
else we wouldn’t be here on a tow-head sixteen or seventeen 
mile below the village—no, indeedy, we would be in that same 
old town again. So I said I didn’t care what was the reason 
they didn’t get us, as long as they didn’t. 

When it was beginning to come on dark, we poked our 
heads out of the cottonwood thicket and looked up, and down, 
and across; nothing in sight; so Jim took up some of the top 
planks of the raft and built a snug wigwam to get under in 
blazing weather and rainy, and to keep the things dry. Jim 
made a floor for the wigwam, and raised it a foot or more above 
the level of the raft, so now the blankets and all the traps was 
out of the reach of steamboat waves. Right in the middle of 
the wigwam we made a layer of dirt about five or six inches 
deep with a frame around it for to hold it to its place; this was 
to build a fire on in sloppy weather or chilly; the wigwam 
would keep it from being seen. We made an extra steering 



100 THE ABVEHTVEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIHH. 


oar, too, because one of the others might get broke, on a snag 
or something. We fixed up a short forked stick to hang the 
old lantern on; because we must always light the lantern 
whenever we see a steamboat coming down stream, to keep 
fi-om getting run over; but we wouldn’t have to light it for 
up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call a 
“ crossing ; ” for the river was pretty high yet, very low banks 
being still a little underwater; so up-bound boats didn’t always 
run the channel, but hunted easy water. 

This second night we run between seven and eight hours, 
with a current that was making over four mile an hour. We 
catched fish, and talked, and we took a swim now and then to 
keep otf sleepiness. It was kind of solemn, drifting down the 
big still river, laying on our backs looking up at the stars, and 
we didn’t ever feel like talking loud, and it warn’t often that 
we laughed, only a little kind of a low chuckle. We had 


mighty good weather, as a general thing, and nothing ever 
happened to us at all, that night, nor the next, nor the next. 

Every night we passed towns, some of them away up on black 
hillsides, nothing but just a shiny bed of lights, not a house 
could you see. The fifth night we passed St. Louis, and it was 
like the whole world lit up. In St. Petersburg they used to 
say there was twenty or thirty thousand people in St. Louis, but 
I never believed it till I see that wonderful spread of lights at 
two o’clock that still night. There wam’t a sound there; every¬ 
body was asleep. 

Every night, now, I used to slip ashore, towards ten o’clock, 
at some little village, and buy ten or fifteen cents’ worth of 
meal or bacon or other stuff to eat; and sometimes I lifted a 
chicken that wam’t roosting comfortable, and took him along. 
Pap always said, take a chicken when you get a chance, because 
if you don’t want him yourself you can easy find somebody that 
does, and a good deed ain’t ever forgot. I never see pap wbea 


BORROWING THINGS. 


101 


he didn’t want the chicken himself, but that is what he used 
to say, anyway. 

Mornings, before daylight, I slipped into corn-fields and 
borrowed a watermelon, or a mushmelon, or a punkin, or some 

of that kind. Pap 


always said it warn’t no 


new com, or things 



HE SOMETlMKa LIFTED A CHICKEN. 


harm to borrow things, if you was meaning to pay them back, 
pometime; but the widow said it warn’t anything but a soft 
name for stealing, and no decent body would do it. Jim said 
he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly 
^ t, M the best way would be for us to pick out two or three 
Dgs om the list eay we wouldn’t borrow them any more 



102 TKE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

—then he reckoned it wouldn’t be no harm to borrow the 
others. So we talked it over all one night, drifting along down 
the river, trying to make up our minds whether to drop the 
watermelons, or the cantelopes, or the mushmelons, or what. 
But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory, and con¬ 
cluded to drop crabapples and p’simmons. We warn’t feeling 
just right before that, but it was all comfortable now. I was 
glad the way it came out, too, because crabapples ain’t ever 
good, and the p’simmons wouldn’t be ripe for two or three 
months yet. 

We shot a water-fowl, now and then, that got up too early 
in the morning or didn’t go to bed early enough in the evening. 
Take it all around, we lived pretty high. 

The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after 
midnight, with a power of thunder and lightning, and the rain 
poured down in a solid sheet. We stayed in the wigwam and 
let the nift take care of itself. When the lightning glared out 
we could see a big straight river ahead, and high rocky bluffs 
on both sides. By-and-by says I, “ Hel-io, Jim, looky yonder ! 
It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock. We was 
drifting straight down for her. The lightning showed her very 
distinct. She was leaning over, with part of her upper deck 
above water, and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean 
and clear, and a chair by the big bell, with an old slouch hat 
hanging on the back of it when the flashes come. 

Well, it being away in the night, and stormy, and all so 
mysterious-like, I felt just the way any other boy would a felt 
when I see that wreck laying there so mournful and lonesome 
in the middle of the river. I wanted to get aboard of her and 
slink around a little, and see what there was there. So I 

says: 

“ Le’s land on her, Jim.” 

But Jim was dead against it, at first. He says; 



SOARDim THE WnECR. 


103 


** I doan’ want to go fool’n ’long er no wrack. We’s doin’ 
blame’ well, en we better let blame’ well alone, as de good book 
says. Like as not dey’s a watchman on dat wrack.” 

“Watchman your grandmother!” I says; “there ain’t 
nothing to watch but the texas and the pilot-house; and do 
you reckon anybody’s going to resk his life for a texas and a 
pilot-house such a night as this, when it’s likely to break up 
and wash off down the river any minute? ” Jim couldn’t say 
nothing to that, so he didn’t try. “ And besides,” I says, “ we 
might borrow something worth having, out of the captain’s 
stateroom. Seegars, / bet you—and cost five cents apiece, solid 
cash. Steamboat captains is always rich, and gets sixty dollars 
a month, and they don’t care a cent what .a thing costs, you 
know, long as they want it. Stick a candle in your pocket; I 
can’t rest, Jim, till we give her a rummaging. Do you reckon 
Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing ? Not for pie, he 
wouldn’t. He’d call it an adventure—that’s what he’d call 
it; and he’d land on that wreck if it was his last act. And 
wouldn’t he throw style into it?—wouldn’t he spread himself, 
nor nothing? Why, you’d think it was Christopher C’lum- 
bus discovering Kingdom-Come. I wish Tom Sawyer was 
here.” 

Jim he grumbled a little, but give in. He said we mustn’t 
talk any more than we could help, and then talk mighty low. 
The lightning showed us the wreck again, just in time, and we 
fetched the stabboard derrick, and made fast there. 

The deck was high out, here. We went sneaking down the 
slope of it to labboard, in the dark, towards the texas, feeling 
our way slow with our feet, and spreading our hands out to 
fend off the guys, for it was so dark we couldn’t see no sign of 
them. Pretty soon we struck the forward end of the skylight, 
and dumb on to it; and the next step fetched us in front of the 
captain’s door, which was open, and by Jimminy, away down 



104 THB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


through the tesas hall we see a light! and all in the same 
second we seemed to hear low voices in yonder! 

Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick, and 
told me to come along. I says, all right; and was going to 
start for the raft; but just then I heard a voice wail out and 
say: 

“ Oh, please don’t boys; I swear I won’t ever tell! ” 

Another voice said, pretty loud : 

“ It’s a lie, Jim Turner. You’ve acted this way before. 
You always want more’n your share of the truck, and you’ve 
always got it, too, because you’ve swore’t if you didn’t you’d 
tell. But this time you’ve said it jest one time too many. 
You’re the meanest, treacherousest hound in this country.” 

By this time Jim was gone for the raft. I was just a-biling 
with curiosity; and I says to myself, Tom Sawyer wouldn’t 
back out now, and so I won’t either; I’m agoing to see what’s 
going on here. So I dropped on my hands and knees, in the 
little passage, and crept aft in the dark, till there wam’t but 
about one stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the texas. 
Then, in there I see a man stretched on the floor and tied 
hand and foot, and two men standing over him, and one of 
them had a dim lantern in his hand, and the other one had a 
pistol. This one kept pointing the pistol at the man’s head on 
the floor and saying— 

“ I’d like to ! And I orter, too, a mean skunk! ” 

The man on the floor would shrivel up, and say: '* Oh, please 
don’t, Bill—I hain’t ever goin’ to tell.” 

And every time he said that, the man with the lantern 
would laugh, and say: 

“ ’Deed you ain’t! You never said no truer thing ’n that, 
you bet you.” And once he said ; “ Hear him beg ! and yit if 
we hadn’t got the best of him and tied him, he’d a killed us 
both. And what/or? Jist for noth’n. Jist because we stood 



TEB PLOTTERS. 


106 


on our that’s what for. But I lay you ain’t agoin’ to 

threaten nobody anymore, Jim Turner. Put wp that pistol, 

Bill.” 

Bill says: 

“ I don’t want to, Jake Packard. I’m for killin’ him—and 
didn’t he kill old Hatfield jist the same way—and don’t he 
deserve it ? ” 



“PLEASE DOK'T, BILL.” 


“ But I don’t want him killed, and I’ve got mv reasons 
for it.” 

“ Bless yo’ heart for them words, Jake Packard ! I’ll never 

forgit you, long’s I live 1 ” says the man on the floor, sort of 
blubbering. 

Packard didn’t take no notice of that, but hung up his lan¬ 
tern on a nail, and started towards where I was, there in the 
dark, and motioned Bill to come. I crawfished as fast as I 




106 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

could, about two yards, but the boat slanted so that I couldn't 
make very good time; so to keep from getting run over and 
catched I crawled into a stateroom on the upper side. The 
man come a-pawing along in the dark, and when Packard got 
to my stateroom, he says: 

“ Here—come in here.” 

And in he came, and Bill after him. But before they got in, 
I was up in the upper berth, cornered, and sorry I come. Then 
they stood there, with their hands on the ledge of the berth, and 
talked. I couldn’t see them, but I could tell where they was, 
by the whisky they’d been having. I was glad I didn’t drink 

whisky; but it wouldn’t made much difference, anyway, because 

most of the time they couldn’t a treed me because I didn t 
breathe. I was too stared.' And besides, a body couldnt 
iireathe, and hear such talk. They talked low and earnest. 
Bill wanted to kill Turner. He says: 

“He’s said he’ll tell, and he will. If we was to give both 
our shares to him now^ it wouldn’t make no difference after the 
row, and the way we’ve served him. Shore’s you’re bom, hell 
turn State’s evidence ; now you hear me. I’m for putting him 

out of his troubles.” 

“ So’m I,” says Packard, very quiet. 

“Blame it, I’d sorter begun to think you wasn’t. \^ell, 

then, that’s all right. Le’s go and do it.” 

“ Hold on a minute; I ain’t had my say yit. You listen to 
me. Shooting’s good, but there’s quieter ways if the thing 8 
got to be done. But what I say, is this ; it ain’t good sense to 
go court’n around after a halter, if you can git at what you re 
up to in some way that’s jist as good and at the same time don 

bring you into no resks. Ain t that so? 

“ You bet it is. But how you goin’ to manage it this time ? 

“ Well, my idea is this; we’ll rustle around and gether up 
whatever pickins we’ve overlooked in the staterooms, and shove 



“jr AIN'T GOOD MORALS. 


107 


for shore and hide the truck. Then we’ll wait. Now I pay it 
ain’t agoin’ to be more ’n two hours bofo’ this wrack breaks up 
and washes off down the river. See? He’ll be drownded, and 
won’t have nobody to blame for it but his own self. I reckon 



“IT ain’t good morals." 


that’s a considerble sight better’n killin’ of him. I’m unfavour¬ 
able to killin’ a man as long as you can git around it; it ain’t 
good sense, it ain’t good morals. Ain’t I right? ” 

‘ Yes I reck’u you are. But s’poae she doTCt break up 
and wash off ? ” 











108 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


\Ve]l, we can wait the two hours, anyway, and see, can’t 

we?” 

“ All right, then; come along.” 

So they started, and I lit out, all in a cold sweat, and 
scrambled forward. It was dark as pitch there; but I said in 
a kind of coarse whisper, “ Jim! ” and he answered up, right at 
my elbow, with a sort of moan, and I says: 

“ Quick, Jim, it ain’t no time for fooling around and moan¬ 
ing ; there’s a gang of murderers in yonder, and if we don’t hunt 
up their boat and set her drifting down the river so these 
fellows can’t get away from the wreck, there’s one of ’em going 
to be in a bad fix. But if we find their boat we can put all of 
’em in a bad fix —for the Sheriff ’ll get ’em. Quick—hurry I 
I’ll hunt the labboard side, you hunt the stabboard. You start 
at the raft, and-” 

“ Oh ! my lordy, lordy! Raf' ? Dey ain’ no raf ’ no mo’, she 
done broke loose en gone!—’en here we is! ” 





CHAPTER XIII.

ELL, I catched my 
breath and most faint¬ 
ed. Shut up on a wreck 
with such a gang as 
that! But it wam’t 
no time to be senti- 
mentering. We’d got 
to find that boat, now 
—had to have it for 
' ourselves. So we went 
a-quaking and shaking 
down the stabboard 
side, and slow work it 
was, too—seemed a 
week before we got to 
the stem. No sign of 
a boat. Jim said he 
didn’t believe he could 
go any further—so 
scared he hadn’t hardly any strength left, he said. But I said 

Mme on, if we get left on this wreck, we are in a fix, sure, 
on we prowled, again. We struck for the stem of the texas, 
ound it, and then scrabbled along forwards on the skylight, 
ging on from shutter to shutter, for the edge of the sky- 


IN A FIX, 



110 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


light was in the water. ^Vhen we got pretty close to the cross* 
hall door, there was the skiff, sure enough! I could just barely 
see her. I felt ever so thankful. In another second I would 
a been aboard of her ; but just then the door opened. One of 
the men stuck his head out, only about a couple of foot from 
me, and I thought I was gone; but he jerked it in again, and 
says: 

“ Heave that blame lantern out o’ sight. Bill! ” 

He flung a bag of something into the boat, and then got in 
himself, and set down. It was Packard. Then Bill he come 
out and got in. Packard says, in a low voice: 

“ All ready—shove off! ” 

I couldn’t hardly hang on to the shutters, I was so weak. 
But Bill says: 

“ Hold on—’d you go through him ? ” 

“No. Didn’t you?” 

“ No. So he’s got his share o* the cash, yet.” 

“Well, then, come along—no use to take truck and leave 
money.” 

“ Say—won’t he suspicion what we’re up to ? ” 

“ Maybe he won’t. But we got to have it anyway. Come 
along.” 

So they got out and went in. 

The door slammed to, because it was on the careened side; 
and in a half second I was in the boat, and Jim come a tum¬ 
bling after me. I out with my knife and cut the rope, and 
away we went! 

We didn’t touch an oar, and we didn’ speak nor whisper, 
nor hardly even breathe. We went gliding swift along, dead 
silent, past the tip of the paddle-box, and past the stem; then 
in a second or two more we was a hundred yards below the 
wreck, and the darkness soaked her up, every last sign of heii 
and we was safe, and knowed it. 



ESCAPING FROyr THE WRECK. 


Ill 


When we was three or four hundred yards down stream, we 
see the lantern show like a little spark at the texas door, for a 
second, and we knowed by that the rascals had missed their 
boat, and was beginning to understand that they was in just as 
much trouble, now, as Jim Turner was. 

Then Jim manned the oars, and we took out after our raft. 
Now was the first time that I begun to worry about the men— 
I reckon I hadn't had time to before. I begun to think how 
dreadful it was, even for murderers, to be in such a fix. I says 
to myself, there ain’t no telling but I might come to be a 
murderer myself, yet, and then how would I like it ? So says 
I to Jim: 

“ The first light we see, we’ll land a hundred yards below 
it or above it, in a place where it’s a good hiding-place for you 
and the skiff, and then I’ll go and fix up some kind of a yam, 
and get somebody to go for that gang and get them out of 
their scrape, so they can be hung when their time comes.” 

But that idea was a failure; for pretty soon it begun to 
storm again, and this time worse than ever. The rain poured 
down, and never a light showed; everybody in bed, I reckon. 
We boomed along down the river, watching for lights and 
watching for our raft. After a long time the rain let up, but 
the clouds staid, and the lightning kept whimpering, and 
by-and-by a flash showed us a black thing ahead, floating, and 
we made for it. 


It was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of 
it again. We seen a light, now, away down to the right, on 
shore. So I said I would go for it. The skiff was half full of 
plunder which that gang had stole, there on the wreck. We 
hustled it on to the raft in a pile, and I told Jim to float along 
doTO, and show a light when he judged he had gone about two 
mile, and keep it burning till I come; then I manned my oari 
and shoved for the light. As I got down towards it, three or 


lla THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

four more showed—up on a hillside. It was a village, I 
closed in above the shore-light, and laid on my oars and floated. 
As I went by, I see it was a lantern hanging on the jackstaff of 
a double-hull ferry-boat. I skimmed around for the watchman, 
a-wondering whereabouts he slept; and by-and-by I found him 
roosting on the bitts, forward, with his head down between his 



knees. I give his shoulder two or three little shoves, and 
begun to cry. 

He stirred up, in a kind of a startlish way; but when he 
see it was only me, he took a good gap and stretch, and then 
he says: 

“ Hello, what’s up? Don’t cry, bub. What's the trouble?" 

1 gays: 




THE WATCHMAN. 


113 


“Pap, and mam, and sis, and-” 

Then I broke down. He says: 

“ Oh, dang it, now, donH take on so, we all has to hare our 
troubles and this’n ’ll come out all right. What’s the matter 
with ’em ? ” 


“They’re—they’re—are you the watchman of the boat?” 

“Yes,” he says, kind of pretty-well-satis6ed like. “I’m 

the captain and the owner, and the mate, and the pilot, and 

watchman, and head deck-hand : and sometimes I’m the freight 

and passengers. I ain’t as rich as old Jim Homback, and I 

can’t be so blame’ generous and good to Tom, Dick, aud Harry 

as what he is, and slam around money the way he does ; but 

I’ve told him a many a time’t I wouldn’t trade places with 

him; for, says I, a sailor’s life’s the life for me, and I’m derned 

if Pd live two mile out o’ town, where there ain’t nothing ever 

goin on, not for all his spondulicks and as much more on top 
of it. Says I-” 

I broke in and says; 

They’re in an awful peck of trouble, and-” 

“ Who is ? ” 


Why, pap, and ma^, and sis, and Miss Hooker; and if 
you d take your ferry-boat and go up there-” 

“ Up where ? Where are they ? ” 

“ On the wreck.” 

“ What wreck ? ” 


“ Why, there ain’t but one.” 

“ you don’t mean the WdLter Scott f " 

« ^ ^ doin’ there, for gracious sakes ? ” 

‘ Wel4 hey didn’t go there a-pnrpose.” 

cliaTtoA f » Why, great goodness, there ain’t no 

chance for ’em if they don’t cAt • v. • . i tru k 

ia the nation did thp„ ^ ^ 

uon m they ever git into such a scrape ? ” 


114 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

“ Easy enough. Miss Hooker was a-visiting, up there to 
the town-” 

“Yes, Booth’s Landing—go on.’* 

“ She was a-visiting, there at Booth’s Landing, and just in 
the edge of the evening she started over with her nigger 
woman in the horse-ferry, to stay all night at her friend's 
house. Miss What-you-may-call-her, I disremember her name, 
and they lost their steering-oar, and swung around and went 
a-floating down, stem-first, about two mile, and saddle-baggsed 
on the wreck, and the ferry man and the nigger woman and 
the horses was all lost, but Miss Hooker she made a grab and 
got aboard the wreck. Well, about an hour after dark, we 
come along down in our trading-scow, and it was so dark we didn’t 
notice the wreck till we was right on it; and so we saddle- 
baggsed ; but all of us was saved but Bill ^^'hipple—and oh, 
he was the bestcretur!—I most wish’t it had been me, I do.” 

“My George ! It’s the beatenest thing I ever struck. And 

then what did you all do ? ” 

“ Well, we hollered and took on, but it’s so wide there, we 
couldn’t make nobody hear. So pap said somebody got to get 
ashore and get help somehow. I was the only one that could 
swim, so I made a dash for it, and Miss Hooker she said if I 
didn’t strike help sooner, come here and hunt up her uncle, 
and he’d fix the thing. I made the land about a mile below, 
and been fooling along ever since, trying to get people to do 
something, but they said, ‘ What, in such a night and such a 
current? there ain’t no sense it; go for the steam-ferry.’ Now 

if you’ll go, and-” 

« By Jackson, I’d like to, and blame it I don’t know but I 
will; but who in the ’dingnations agoin’ to pay for it? Do 

you reckon your pap 

Why, tiuies all right. Miss Hooker she told me. parti^ 
eular, that her uncle Homback ” 



SINKING. 


116 


“ Great guns! is he her uncle ? F^onky here, you break for 
that light over yonder-way, and turn out we^t when you git 
there, and about a quarter of a mile out you'll come to the 
tavern; tell ’em to dart you out to Jim flornbuck’s and he’ll 
foot the bill. And don’t you fool around any, because he'll 
wan’t to know the news. Tell him I’ll have his niece all safe 
before he can get to town. Hump yourself, now ; I’m agoing 
up around the corner here, to roust out my engineer. 



TUB WBECK. 


I struck for the light, but as soon as he turned the corner 
I went back and got into my skiff and baled her out and then 
pulled up shore in the easy water about six hundred yards, and 

in among some woodboats; for I couldn’t rest 
easy till I could see the ferry-boat start. But take it all 
around, I was feeling ruther comfortable on accounts of taking 
^ all this trouble for that gang, for not many would a done it. 
I wished the widow knowed about it. I judged she would be 










































116 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


proud of me for helping the:>e rapscallions, because rapscallions 
and dead beats is the kind the widow and good people takes 
the most interest in. 

Well, before long, here comes the wreck, dim and dusky, 
sliding along down! A kind of cold shiver went through me, 
and then I struck out for her. She was very deep, and I see 
in a minute there warn’t much chance for anybody being alive 
in her. I pulled all around her and hollered a little, but there 



WE TURNED IN AND SCEI'T. 


wasn’t any answer; all dead still. I felt a little bit heavy- 
hearted about the gang, but not much, for I reckoned if thej- 
could stand it, I could. 

Then here comes the ferry-boat; so I shoved for the middle 
of the river on a long down-stream slant; and when I judged 
I was out of eye-reach, I laid on my oars, and looked back and 
see her go and smell around the wreck for Miss Hooker’s 
remainders, because the captain would know her uncle Horn- 
back wouVl want them; and then pretty soon the ferry-boat 



117 


. V T .Ka i' i 


1 . • • 

rive it up aud went for ’siiore, 'and I laid into my work and 


went a-booming down the river. 

It did seem a powerful long time before Jim’s light showed 
up; and when it did show, it looked like it was a thousand 
mile off. By the time I got there the shy was beginning to 
get a little gray in the east; so we struck for an island, and 
hid the raft, and sunk the skiff, and turned in and slept like 


dead people. 






V 





CHAPTER XIV.

Y-and-by, \7he11 we got 
up, we turned over the 
truck the gang had stcde 
off of the wreck, and 
found boots, and blan¬ 
kets, and clothes, and 
all sorts of other things, 
and a lot of books, and 
a spyglass, and three 
boxes of seegars. We 
hadn’t ever been this 
rich before, in neither 
of our lives. The see- 
gars was prime. We 
laid off all the after¬ 
noon in the woods talk¬ 
ing, and me reading the 
books, and having a 
general good time. I 
told Jim all about what 
happened inside the wreck, and at the ferry-boat j and I said 
these kinds of things was adventures; but he said he didn’t 
want no more adventures. He said that when I went in the 
texas, and he crawled back to get on the raft and found her 


TUIININO OVEa THE TKOCK. 


A GENERAL GOOD TIME. 


110 


jfone, he nearljr died ; because he judged it was all up with 
him, anyway it could be fixed ; for if he didn’t get saved he 
would get drownded; and if he did get saved, whoever saved 
him would send him back home so as to get the reward, and 
then Miss AVatsou would sell him South, sure. Well, he was 
right; he was most always right; he had an uncommon level 
head, for a nigger. 

I read considerable to Jim about kings, and dukes, and 

earls, and such, and how gaudy they dressed, and how much 

style they put on, and called each other your majesty, and your 

grace, and your lordship, and so on, ’stead of mister; and Jim’s 

eyes bugged out, and he was interested. He says: 

“ I didn’t know dey was so many un um. I hain’t heam 

bout none \m um, skasely, but ole King Sollermun, onless you 

counts dem kings dat’s in a pack er k’yards. How much do a 
king git ? ” 

“ Get ? ” I says ; “ why, they get a thousand dollars a month 
if they want it; they can have just as much as they want; 
everything belongs to them.” 

« AinH dat gay ? En what dey got to do, Huck ? ” 

T/tey don t do nothing! Why, how you talk. They just 
set around.” 

“ No—is dat so ? ” 

Of course it is. They just set around. Except maybe 

w en ere s a war; then they go to the war. But other times 

around; or go hawking—just hawking and sr^— 
oh.—d you hear a noise ? ” 

fi ft ^ looked; but it wam’t nothing but the 

0 a steamboat s wheel, away down coming around the 

point; so we come back. 

fiisH other times, when things is dull, they 

fk • and if everybody don’t go just so he 

whacks their heads off. But mostly they hang round the harem ” 




SOLOMON AND HIS MILLION WIVES. 

** Why, yes, dat’s so; I—I’d done forgot it. A harem’s a 
bo’d’n-house, I reck’n. Mos’ likely dey has rackety times in 
de nussery. En I reck’n de wives quarrels considable ; en dat 
'crease de racket. Yit dey say Sollermun de wises’ man dat 
ever live’. I doan* take no stock in dat. Bekase why : would 
a wise man want to live in de mids’ er sich a blimblammin’ all 
de time ? No—’deed he wouldn’t. A wise man ’ud take en 


120 TBB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBETtllT FINN 


** Roun’ de whicli ? ” 

“ Harem.” 

“ What’s de harem ? ” 

“The place where he keep his wives. Don’t you know 

about the harem? Solomon had one; he had about a million 
wives.” 








THE RAHEM. 


121 


butt’ a biler-factry ; en den he oould shet down de biler-factry 
when he want to res’.” 

“Well, but he was the wisest man, anyway; because the 
widow she told me so, her own self.” 

“I doan k’yer what de widder say, he wai'ii't no wise man, 
nuther. He had some er de dad-fetchedes’ ways I ever see. 
Does you know ’bout dat chile dat he ’uz gwyne to chop in 
two ? ” 



THB 8TOST or “ 80LLERMUH." 


“ Ves, the widow told me all about it.” 

“ Well, den! Warn’ dat de beatenes’ notion in de worl’ ? 
Yon jes’ take en look at it a minute. Dah’s de stump, dah— 
data one er de women; heah’s you-dat’s de yuther one ; I’s 
bollennun; en dish-yer dollar bill’s de chile. Bofe un you 
Blmms ,t. What does I do? Does I shin aroun’mongs’de 
neighbours en fine out which un you de biU do b’long to, en 


122 THE AHVEVTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


han’ it over to de right one, all safe en soun’, de way dat any¬ 
body dat had any gumption would ? No—I take en whack de 
bill in two, en give half un it to you, en de yuther half to de 
yuther woman. Dat’s de way Sollermun was gwyne to do wid 
de chile. Now I want to ast you: what’s de use er dat half a 
bill ?—can’t buy noth’n wid it. En what use is a half a chile ? 
I would’n give a dem for a million un um.” 

“ But hang it, Jim, you’ve clean missed the point—blame 
it, you’ve missed it a thousand mile.” 

“ Who ? Me ? Go ’long. Doan’ talk to me ’bout yo’ 
pints. I reck’n I knows sense when I sees it j en dey ain’ no 
sense in sich doin’s as dat. De ’spute wam’t ’bout a half a 
chile, de ’spute was ’bout a whole chile ; en de man dat think 
he kin settle a ’spute ’bout a whole chile wid a half a chile, 
doan’ know enough to come in out’n de rain. Doan* talk to 
me ’bout Sollermun, Huck, I knows him by de back,” 

“ But I tell you you don’t get the point.” 

“ Blame de pint! I reck’n I knows what I knows. En 
mine you, de real pint is down furder—it’s down deeper. It 
lays in de way Sollermun was raised. You take a man dat’s 
got on’y one er two cbillen; is dat man gw3Tie to be waseful o’ 
chillen ? No, he ain’t; he can’t ’ford it. He know how to 
value ’em. But you take a man dat’s got ’bout five million 
chillen runnin’ roun’de house, en it’s diffunt. He as soon chop 
a chile in two as a cat. Dey’s plenty mo’. A chile er 
two, mo’ er less, wam’t no consekens to Sollermun, dad fetch 
him! ” 

I never see such a nigger. If be got a notion in his head 
once, there wam’t no getting it out again. He was the most 
down on Solomon of any nigger I ever see. So I went to talk¬ 
ing about other kings, and let Solomon slide. I told about 
Louis Sixteenth that got his head cut off in France long time 
ago; and about his little boy the dolphin, that would a been a 



FRENCR. 


123 


king, but they took and shut him up in jail, and Bome say he 

died there. 

“ Po* little chap.” 

“But some says he got out and got away, and come to 
America.” 

“ Dat’s good! But he’ll be pooty lonesome—dey ain’ no 
kings here, is dey, Huck ? ” 

“ No.” 

“ Den he cain’t git no situation. 'W’hat he gwyne to do ? ” 

“ Well, I don’t know. Some of them gets on the police, 
and some of them learns people how to talk French.” 

“Why, Huck, doan’ de French people talk de same way we 
does?” 

“ No, Jim ; you couldn’t understand a word they said—not 
a single word.” 

“ Well, now, I be ding-busted! How do dat come ? ” 

“ I don’t know ; but it’s so. I got some of their jabber out 
of a hook. S’pose a man was to come to you and say Folly-voo^ 
franzy —what would you think ? ” 

“I wouldn’ think nuff’n; I’d take en bust him over de 
head. Dad is, if he wam’t white, I wouldn’t ’low no nigger 
to call me dat.” 

“Shucks, it ain’t calling you anything. It’s only saying 
do you know how to talk French.” 

“ Well, den, why couldn’t he say it ? ” 

“Why, he is a-saying it. That’s a Frenchman’s way of 
saying it,” 

“ Well, it’s a blame* ridicklous way, en I doan’ want to hear 
no mo’ ’bout it, Dey ain’ no sense in it.” 

“ Looky here, Jim ; does a cat talk like we do ? ” 

“ No, a cat don’t.” 

“ Well, does a cow ? ” 

“ No, a cow don’t, nuther.” 



124 TEE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ Does a cat talk like a cow, or a cow talk like a cat ? ** 

“ No, dey don’t.” 

“ It’s natural and right for ’em to talk different from each 
other, ain’t it ? ” 

“ ’Course.” 

“ And ain’t it natural and right for a cat and a cow to talk 
different from us ? ” 

“ Why, mos’ sholy it is.” 

“ Well, then, why ain’t it natural and right for a French'- 
man to talk different from us ? You answer me that.” 

“ Is a cat a man, Huck ? ” 

“ No.” 

“ Well, den, dey ain’t no sense in a cat talkin’ like a man. 
Is a cow a man ?—er is a cow a cat ? ” 

“No, she ain’t either of them.” 

“ Well, den, she ain’t got no business to talk like either 
one er the yuther of ’em. Is a Frenchman a man ? ” 

“Yes.” 

“ Welly den ! Dad blame it, why doan’ he talk like a man? 
You answer me dat! ” 

I see it warn’t no use wasting words—you can’t learn a 
nigger to argue. So I quit. 




Wi 


'a / ' 


■w ■■ 


'. w 




•i-c* 


r/. 




't^-Tric. 


1 iiptlq 


^f'» 


w* WOULD SBLL THB RAPT.” 

CHAPTER XV.

li judged thatthreenighta 
more would fetch us to 
Cairo, at the bottom 
of Illinois, where the 
Ohio River comes in, 
and that was what 
we was after. We 
would sell the raft and 
get on a steamboat 
and go way up the 
Ohio amongst the free 
States, and then be 
out of trouble. 

Well, the second 
night a fog begun to 
come on, and we made 
for a tow-head to tie 
to, for it wouldn’t do 


Mlili THlfi RAPT.” J. J_ ^ 

to try to run m fog; 
but when I paddled ahead in the canoe, with the line, to make 
there wam’t anything but little saplings to tie to. I 
passed the line around one of them right on the edge of the 
cut bank, but there was a stiff current, and the raft come 
ooming down so lively she tore it out by the roots and away 



126 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


she went, I see tlie fog closing down, and it made me so sick 
and scared I couldn’t budge for most a half a minute it seemed 
to me—and then there warn’t no raft in sight; you couldn’t 
see twenty yards. I jumped into the canoe and run back to 
the stem and grabbed the paddle and set her back a stroke. 
But she didn’t come. I was in such a hurry I hadn’t untied 
her. I got up and tried to untie her, but I was so excited my 
hands shook so I couldn’t hardly do anything with them. 

As soon as I got started I took out after the raft, hot and 
heavy, right down the tow-head. That was all right as far as 
it went, but the tow-head warn’t sixty yards long, and the 
minute I flew by the foot of it I shot out into the solid white 
fog, and hadn’t no more idea which way I was going than a 
dead man. 

Thinks I, it won’t do to paddle ; flrst I know I’ll run into 
the bank or a tow-head or something; I got to set still and 
float, and yet it’s mighty fidgety business to have to hold your 
hands still at such a time. I whooped and listened. Away 
down there, somewheres, I hears a small whoop, and up comes 
my spirits. I went tearing after it, listening sharp to hear it 
again. The next time it come, I see I wara’t heading for it 
but heading away to the right of it. And the next time, I was 
heading away to the left of it—and not gaining on it much, 
either, for I was flying around, this way and that and t’other, 
but it was going straight ahead all the time. 

I did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan, and beat 
it all the time, but he never did, and it was the still places 
between the whoops that was making the trouble for me. 
Well, I fought along, and directly I hears the whoop behind 
me. I was tangled good, now. That was somebody else’s 
whoop, or else I was turned around. 

I throwed the paddle down. I heard the whoop again; it 
was behind me yet, but in a different place; it kept coming, 



EUCK LOSES TEE RAFT. 


127 


and kept changing its place, and I kept answering, till by-and-bj 
it was in front of me again and I knowedthe current bad swung 
the canoe’s bead do^TO stream and I was all right, if that was 
Jim and not some other raftsman hollering. I couldn’t tell 
nothing about voices in a fog, for nothing don’t look natural 
nor sound natural in a fog. 

The whooping went on, and in about a minute I come a 
booming down on a cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees 
on it, and the current throwed me off to the left and shot by, 
amongst a lot of snags that fairly roared, the current was tear¬ 
ing by them so swift. 

In another second or two it was solid white and still again. 

I set perfectly still, then, listening to my heart thump, and I 
reckon I didn’t draw a breath while it thumped a hundred. 

I just give up, then. I knowed what the matter was. 
That cut bank was an island, and Jim had gone down t’other 
side of it. It warn’t no tow-head, that you could float by in 
ten minutes. It had the big timber of a 
might be five or six mile long and more than a half a mile 
wide. 

I kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fifteen minutes, I 
reckon. I was floating along, of course, four or five mile an 
hour; but you don’t ever think of that. No, yon feel like you 
are laying dead still on the water; and if a little glimpse of a 
snag slips by, you don’t think to yourself how fast you're going, 
but you catch your breath and think, my! how that snag’s 
tearing along. If you think it ain’t dismal and lonesome out 
in a fog that way, by yourself, in the night, you try it once— 
you’ll see. 

Next, for about a half an hour, I whoops now and then ; at 
last I hears the answer a long ways off, and tries to follow it, 
but I couldn’t do it, and directly I judged I’d got into a nest 
of tow-heads, for I had little dim glimpses of them on both 


regular island; it 



128 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

sides of me, sometimes just a narrow channel between; and 
some that I couldn’t see, I knowed was there, because I’d hear 
the wash of the current against the old dead brush and trash 
that hung over the banks. Well, I warn’t long losing the 
whoops, down amongst the tow heads; and I only tried to 
chase them a little while, anyway, because it was worse than 
chasing a Jack-o-lantem. You never knowed a sound dodge 
around so, and swap places so quick and so much. 



AMONG THE SNAGS. 


I had to claw away from the bank pretty lively, four or five 
times, to keep from knocking the islands out of the river; and 
60 I judged the raft must be butting into the bank every now 
and then, or else it would get further ahead and clear out of 
hearing—it was floating a little faster than what I was. 

Well, I seemed to be in the open river again, by-and-by, 
but I couldn’t hear no sign of a whoop nowheres. I reckoned 


asleep on the raft. 


m 

J im had fetched up on a snag, maybe, and it was all up with 
him. I was good and tired, so I laid down in the canoe and 
said I wouldn’t bother no more. I didn’t want to go to sleep, 
of course ; but I was so sleepy I couldn’t help it j so I thought 
I would take just one little cat-nap. 

But I reckon it was more than a cat-nap, for when I waked 



\.tiLEikP ON THE RAIT. 


up the stars was shining bright, the fog was all gone, and I 
was spinning down a big bend stem first. First I didn’t know 
where I was; I thought I was dreaming; and when things 
begun to come back to me, they seemed to come up dim out 
of last week. 

It was a monstrous big river here, with the tallest and the 
thickest kind of timber on both banks; just a solid wall, as 
well as I could see, by the stars. I looked away down stream, 
and seen a black speck on the water. I took out after it; but 




ISO THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN 


when I got to it it wam’t nothing but a couple of saw-loge 
made fast together. Then I see another speck, and chased 
that; then another, and this time I was right. It was the 
raft. 

^^^len I got to it Jim was sitting there with his head down 
between his knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the 
steering oar. The other oar was smashed off, and the raft was 
littered up with leaves and branches and dirt. So she’s had a 
rough time. 

I made fast and laid down imder Jim’s nose on the raft, 
and begun to gap, and stretch my fists out against Jim, and 
says: 

“ Hello, Jim, have I been asleep ? Why didn’t you stir 
me up ? ” 

“ Groodness gracious, is dat you, Huck ? En you ain’ dead 
—you ain’ drownded—you’s back agin ? It’s too good for true, 
honey, it’s too good for true. Lemme look at you, chile, 
lemme feel o’ you. No, you ain’ dead! you’s back agin’, live 
en soun’, jis de same ole Huck—de same ole Huck, thanks to 
goodness! ” 

“ Wliat’s the matter with you, Jim ? You been a drink¬ 
ing ? ” 

“ Drinkia’ ? Has I ben a drinkin’ ? Has 1 had a chance 
to be a drinkin’ ? ” 

“ Well, then, what makes you talk so wild ? ” 

“ How does I talk wild ? ” 

** Howf why, hain’t you been talking about my coming 
back, and all that stuff, as if Fd been gone away?” 

“ Huck—Huck Finn, you look me in de eye, look me in 
de eye. Hcuin't you ben gone away ? ” 

“ Hone away ? Why, what in the nation do you mean ? I 
hain’t been gone anywheres. Where would I go to ? ” 

“ Well, looky here, boss, dey’s sumf’n wrong, dey is. Is I 



miCK FINDS THE RAFT. 


ISl 


m«, or who is I ? Is 1 heah, or whah is I? Now dat’s what 
Twants to know? ” 

“Well, I think you’re here,plain enough, but I think you’re 

a tang'e-headed old fool, Jim.” 

“lis, isl? Well you answer me dis. Didn’t you tote out 
de line in de canoe, fer to make fas* to de tow-head ? ” 

“No, I didn’t. What tow-head? I hain’t seen no tow- 
head.” 

“You hain’t seen no tow-head? Looky here—didn’t de 
line pull loose en de raf go a hummin* down de river, en leave 
you en de canoe behine in de fog ? ” 

“^Tiatfog?” 

“Why de fog, De fog dat’s ben aroun’ all night. En 
didn’t you whoop, en didn’t I whoop, tell we got mix’ up in de 
islands en one un us got los’ en t’other one was jis’ as good as 
los’, ’kase he didn’ know whah he wuz ? En didn’t I bust up 
agin a lot er dem islands en have a turrible time en mos’ git 
drownded ? Now ain’ dat so, boss—ain’t it so ? You answer 
me dat.” 

“Well, this is too many for me, Jim. I hain’t seen no fog, 
nor no islands, nor no troubles, nor nothing. I been setting 
here talking with you all night till you went to sleep about 
ten minutes ago, and I reckon I done the same. You couldn’t 
a got drunk in that time, so of course you’ve been dreaming,” 

“ Dad fetch it, how is I gwyne to dream all dat in ten 
minutes ? ” 

“ Well, bang it all, you did dream it, because there didn’t 
any of it happen.” 

“ But Buck, it’s all jis’ as plain to me as-” 

“It don’t make no difference how plain it is, there ain’t 
nothing in it, I know, because I’ve been here all the time.” 

Jim didn’t say nothing for about five minutes, but set there 
- studying over it. Then he says; 



182 THE ADVENTURED OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

“Well, den, I reck*n I did dream it, Huck; but dog my 
cats ef it ain’t de powerfullest dream I ever see. En I hain’t 
ever had no dream b’fo’ dat’s tired me like dis one.” 

“ Oh, well, that’s all right, because a dream does tire a body 
like everything, sometimes. But this one was a staving dream 
—tell me all about it, Jim.” 

So Jim went to work and told me the whole thing right 
through, just as it happened, only he painted it up consider¬ 
able. Then he said he must start in and “’terpret” it, because 
it was sent for a warning. He said the first tow-head stood for 
a man that would try to do us some good, but the current was 
another man that would get us away from him. The whoops 
was warnings that would come to us every now and then, and 
if we didn’t try hard to make out to understand them they’d 
just take us into bad luck, ’stead of keeping us out of it. The 
lot of tow-heads was troubles we was going to get into with 
quarrelsome people and all kinds of mean folks, but if we 
minded our business and didn’t talk back and aggravate them, 
we would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big 
clear river, which was the free States, and wouldn’t have no 
more trouble. 

It had clouded up pretty dark just after I got on to the 
raft, but it was clearing up again, now. 

“ Ob, well, that’s all interpreted well enough, as far as it 
goes, Jim,” I says; “but what does these things stand for?” 

It was the leaves and rubbish on the raft, and the smashed 

oar. You could see them first rate, now. 

Jim looked at the trash, and then looked at me, and back 
at the trash again. He had got the dream fixed so strong in 
his head that he couldn’t seem to shake it loose and get the 
facts back into its place again, right away. But when he did 
get the thing straightened around, he looked at me steady, 
without ever smiling, and says: 


TRASH. 


183 


“ What do dey stan’ for? I’s gwyne to tell you \Mien I 
got all wore out wid work, en wid de callin’ for you, en went 
to sleep, my heart wuz mos’ broke bekase you wuz los, en 1 
didn’ k’yer no mo’ what become er me en de rar. En when I 
wake up en fine you back agin*, all safe en soun’, de tears come 
en I could a got down on my knees en kiss’ yo’ foot I’s so 
thankful. En all you wuz thinkin ’bout wuz how you could 
make a fool uv ole Jim wid a lie. Dat truck dab is trash ; en 
trash is what people is dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren’s 
en makes ’em ashamed.” 

Then he got up slow, and walked to the wigwam, and went 
in there, without saying anything but that. But that was 
enough. It made me feel so mean I could almost kissed his 
foot to get him to take it back. 

It was fifteen minutes before I could work myself up to go 
and humble myself to a nigger—but I done it, and I warn’t 
ever sorry for it afterwards, neither. I didn’t do him no more 
mean tricks, and I wouldn’t done that one if I’d a knowed it 
would make him feel that way. 





•IT AUOI NTED TO POUETUINO BBI^'0 A 

RAFTSMAN.” 

CHAPTER XVI.

slept most all day, and 
started out at night, a 
little ways behind a 
monstrous long raft 
that was as long going 
by as a procession. 
She had four long 
sweeps at each end, so 
we judged she carried 
as many as thirty men, 
likely. She had five 
big wigwams aboard, 
wide apart, and an 
open camp fire in the 
middle, and a tall 
flag-pole at each end. 
There was a power of 
style about her. It 
amounted to some¬ 
thing being a raftsman 


on such a craft as that. 


We went drifting down into a big bend, and the night 
clouded up and got hot. The river was very wide, and was 
walled with solid timber on both sides ; you couldn’t see a 



£:XVECTA TION. 


\Sb 


break in it hardly ever, or a light. We talked about Cairo, 
and wondered whether we would know it when we got to it. 

I said likely we wouldn’t, because I had heard say there warn’t 
but about a dozen houses there, and if they didn t happen to 
have them lit up, how was we going to know we was passing a 
town ? Jim said if the two big rivers joined together there, 
that would show. But I said maybe we might think we was 
passing the foot of an island and coming into the same old 
river again. That disturbed Jim—and me too. So the ques¬ 
tion was, what to do ? I said, paddle ashore the first time a 
light showed, and tell them pap was behind, coming along with 
a trading-scow, and was a green hand at the business, and 
wanted to know how far it was to Cairo. Jim thought it was a 
good idea, so we took a smoke on it and waited. 

There wam’t nothing to do, now, but to look out sharp for 
the town, and not pass it without seeing it. He said he’d be 
mighty sure to see it, because he’d be a free man the minute 
he seen it, but if he missed it he’d be in the slave country 
again and no more show for freedom. Every little while he 
jumps up and says; 

“ Dah she is ! ” 

But it wam’t. It was Jack-o-lantems, or lightning-bugs 5 
80 he set down again, and went to watching, same as before. 
Jim said it made him all over trembly and feverish to be so 
close to freedom. Well, I can tell you it made me all over 
trembly and feverish, too, to hear him, because I begun to get 
it through my head that he wad most free—and who was to 
blame for it? Why, me. I couldn’t get that out of my con¬ 
science, no how nor no way. It got to troubling me so I 
couldn’t rest; I couldn’t stay still in one place. It hadn’t ever 
come home to me before, what this thing was that I was doing. 
But now it did; and it staid with me, and scorched me more 
and more. I tried to make ont to myself that I wam’t to blame, 



l3d ARVENTV'R'ES OF SUCKLEBEltRT FINN. 


because 1 didn’t run Jim off from his rightful owner; but it 
wani’t no use, conscience up and says, every time, “ But yon 
knowed he was running for his freedom, and you could a 
paddled ashore and told somebody.” That was so—I couldn’t 
get around that, no way. That was where it pinched. Conscience 
says to me, “ ^^’hat had poor Miss Watson done to you, that 
you could see her nigger go off right under your eyes and never 
say one single word ? What did that poor old woman do to 
you, that you could treat her so mean ? Why, she tried to learn 
you your book, she tried to learn you your manners, she tried 
to be good to you every way she knowed how. That's what she 
done.” 

I got to feeling so mean and so miserable I most wished I 
was dead. I fidgeted up and down the raft, abusing myself to 
myself, and Jim was fidgeting up and down past me. We 
neither of us could keep still. Every time he danced around 
and says, “ Dab’s Cairo! ” it went though me like a shot, and I 
thought if it was Cairo I reckoned I would die of miserable¬ 
ness. 

Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talking to my¬ 
self. He was saying how the first thing he would do when he 
got to a free State he would go to saving up money and never 
spend a single cent, and when he got enough he would buy his 
wife, which was owned on a farm close to where Miss Watson 
lived : and then they would both work to buy the two childrenj 
and if their master wouldn’t sell them, they’d get an Ab’litionist 
to go and steal them. 

It most froze me to hear such talk. He wouldn’t ever 
dared to talk such talk in his life before. Just see what a 
difference it made in him the minute he judged he was about 
free. It was according to the old saying, “ Give a nigger an 
inch and he’ll take an ell.” Thinks I, this is what comes of 
tny not thinking. Here was this nigger which I had as good 



''GOOD OLE CAIRO." 


137 


as helped to run away, coming right out flat-footed and saying 
he would steal his children—children that belonged to a man 
I didn’t even know; a man that hadn’t ever done me no harm. 

I was sorry to hear Jim say that, it was such a lowering of 
him. My conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever, 
until at last I says to it, “ Let up on me—it ain’t too late, 
yet—I’ll paddle ashore at the first light, and tell.” I fdt 
easy, and happy, and light as a feather, right off. All my 
troubles was gone. I went to looking out sharp for a light, 
and sort of singing to myself. By-and-by one showed. Jim 
sings out: 

“We’s safe, Huck, we’s safe! Jump up and crack yo’ heels, 
dat’s de good ole Cairo at las’, I jis knows it! ” 

I says: 

“ rU take the canoe and go see, Jim. It mightn’t be, you 
know.” 

He jumped and got the canoe ready, and put bis old eoat 
in the bottom for me to set on, and give me the paddle; and 
as I shoved off, he says: 

“ Booty soon I’ll be a’Shout’n for joy, en I’ll say, it’s all on 
accounts o* Huck; I’s a free man, en I couldn’t ever ben free ef 
it hadn’ ben for Huck; Huck done it. Jim won’t ever forgit 
you, Huck; you’s de bes’ &en’ Jim’s ever had; en you’s de 
OTdy fren’ ole Jim’s got now.” 

I was paddling off, all in a sweat to tell on him ; but when 
he says this, it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me. 
I went along slow then, and I wam’t right down certain 
whether I was glad I started or whether I wam't. When I was 
fifty yards off, Jim says: 

“ Dah you goes, de ole true Huck; de on’y white genlman 
dat ever kep’ his promise to ole Jim.” 

Well, I just felt sick. But I says, I got to do it—I can’t 
get out of it. Right then, along comes a skiff with two men 



l&i TUB adventures OF RUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


in it, mth guns, and they stopped and 1 stopped. One of them 
says; 

“ What’s that, yonder ? ” 

“ A piece of a raft,” I says. 

“ Do yon belong on it ? ” 

“ Yes, sir.” 

“Any men on it? ” 

“ Only one, sir.” 

“ Well, there’s five niggers ran off to-night, np yonder above 
the head of the bend. Is your man white or black ? ” 

I didn’t answer up prompt. I tried to, but the words wouldn t 
come. 1 tried, for a second or two, to brace up and out with it, 
but I warn’t man enough—hadn’t the spunk of a rabbit. 1 
see I was weakening ; so I just give up trying, and up and says. 
“ He’s white.” 

“I reckon we’ll go and see for ourselves.” 

I wish you would,” says I, “ because it’s pap thats there, 
and maybe you’d help me tow the raft ashore where the light 
is. He’s sick—and so is mam and Mary Ann.” 

“ Oh, the devil! we’re in a hurry, boy. But I s’pose we’ve 
got to. Come—buckle to your paddle, and let’s get along.” 

I buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars. When 

we had made a stroke or two, I says: 

“ Pap’ll be mighty much obleeged to you, I can toll you. 
Everybody goes away when I want them to help me tow the 

raft ashore, and I can’t do it by myself. ^ 

“Well, that’s infernal mean. Odd, too. Say, boy, whats 

the matter with your father ? ” 

“ It’s the—a—the—well, it ain’t anything much.” 

They stopped pulling. It wam’t but a mighty ways to the 

raft, now. One says : 

“Boy, that’s a lie. What m the matter with your pap? 
Answer up square, now, and it'll be the better for you. 



A n'JflTE LIE. 


13ft 

«I will, sir, I will, honest— but don’t leave us, please. It’a 
the—the—gentlemen, if you’ll only puU ahead, and let me 
heave you the head-line, you won’t have to come a-near the 
raft—please do.” 

“ Set her back John, set her back! ” says one. They backed 
water. “ Keep away, boy—keep to looard. Confound it, I 
just expect the wind has blowed it to us. Your pap’s got the 



sraall-pox, and you know it precious well. Why didn’t you come 
out and say so ? T)o you want to spread it all over ? ” 

“Well,” says I, a-hlubbering, “I’ve told everybody before, 
and then they just went away and left us,” 

“ Poor devil, there’s something in that. We are right down 
sorry for you, but we—well, hang it, we don’t want the small¬ 
pox, yon see. Look here, I’ll tell you what to do. Don’t you 
try to land by yourself, or you’ll smash everything to pieces. 





















140 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


You float along down about twenty miles and youll come to a 
town on the left-hand side of the river. It will be long after 
aun-up, then, and when you ask for help, you tell them youi 
folks are all down with chills and fever. Don’t be a fool again, 
and let people guess what is the matter. Now we’re trying to 
do you a kindness; so you just put twenty miles between us, 
that’s a good boy. It wouldn’t do any good to land yonder 
where the light is—^it’s only a wood-yard. Say—I reckon 
your father’s poor, and I’m bound to say he’s in pretty hard 
luck. Here—I’ll put a twenty dollar gold piece on this board, 
and you get it when it floats by. I feel mighty mean to leave 
you, but my kingdom I it won’t do to fool with small-pox, don’t 
you see ? ” 

“ Hold on, Parker,” says the other man, “ here’s a twenty 
to put on the board for me. Good-bye, boy, you do as ISh. 
Parker told you, and you’ll be all right.” 

“ That’s so, my boy—good-bye, good-bye. If you see any 
runaway niggers, you get help and nab them, and you can 
make some money by it,’' 

“Good-bye, sir,” says I, “I won’t let no runaway niggers 


get by me if I can help it.” 

They went off and I got aboard the raft, feeling bad and 
low, because I knowed very well I had done wrong, and I see it 
wam’t no use for me to try to learn to do right; a body that don’t 
get started right when he’s little, ain’t got no show— when the 
pinch comes there ain’t nothing to back him up and keep him 
to his work, and so he gets beat. Then I thought a minute, and 


says to myself, hold on,—s’pose you’d a done right and give 
Jim up ; would you felt better than what you do now ? No, says 
I, I’d feel bad—I’d feel just the same way I do now. Well, then, 
says I, what’s the use you learning to do right, when it’s 
troublesome to do right and ain’t no trouble to do wrong, and 


the wages is just the same? T was stuck. I couldn’t answei 



FLOATING CURRENCY. 


141 


that So I reckoned I wouldn’t bother no more about it, but 
after this always do whichever come handiest at the time. 

I went into the wigwam; Jim warn’t there. I looked all 
around ; he warn’t anywhere. I says: 

“Jim!” 



HERB I IB, HUCK." 


“ Here I is, Huck. Is dey out o’ sight yit? Don’t talk 
loud.” 

He was in the river, under the stem oar, with just hie nose 
out. I told him they was out of sight, so he come aboard. 
He says: 

“ I was a-listenin’ to all de talk, en I slips into de river en 
was gwyne to shove for sho’ if dey come aboard. Den I was 











































































































































































142 THB ADVBNTVItES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINE. 

g^yne to swim to de raf agin when dey was gone. But lawsy, 
how you did fool ’em, Huck! Dat wuz de smartes’ dodge 1 I 
tell you, chile, I ’speck it save’ ole Jim—ole Jim ain’t gwyne to 
forgit you for dat, honey.” 

Then we talked about the money. It was a pretty good 
raise, twenty dollars apiece. Jim said we could take deck 
passage on a steamboat now, and the money would last us as 
far as we wanted to go in the free States. He said twenty 
mile more wam’t far for the raft to go, but he wished we was 
already there. 

Towards daybreak we tied up, and Jim was mighty par¬ 
ticular about hiding the raft good. Then he worked all 
day fixing things in bundles, and getting all ready to quit 

rafting. 

That night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a 

town away do\vn in a left hand bend. 

I went off in the canoe, to ask about it. Pretty soon I 
found a man out in the river with a skiff, setting a trot^line. I 

ranged up and says: 

“ Mister, is that town Cairo ? ” 

‘‘ Cfairo ? no. You must be a blame* fool.” 

“ What town is it, mister? ” 

“ If you want to know, go and find out. If you stay here 
botherin’ around me for about half a minute longer, you’ll get 

something you won’t want. ^ l i. i 

I paddled to the raft. Jim was awful disappointed, but I 

said never mind, Cairo would be the next place, I reckoned. 

We passed another town before daylight, and I was going 

out again; but it was high ground, so I didn’t go. No high 

ground about Cairo, Jim said. I had forgot it. We laid up for 

the day, on a tow-head tolerably close to the left-hand bank. 

I begun to suspicion something. So did Jim, I says: 

“ Maybe we went by Cairo in the fog that night.” 



BY CAIRO. 


14fl 


fle says: 

« Doan’ less’talk about it, Huck. Po’ niggers can\ have 
no luck. I awluz ’spected dat rattle-snake skin warn’t done 

wid its work.” 

«I wish I’d never seen that snake-skin, Jim—I do wish I’d 
never laid eyes on it.” 

«It ain’t yo’ fault, Huck; you didn’ know. Don’t you 
blame yo’self ’bout it.” 

When it was daylight, here was the clear Ohio water in 
shore, sure enough, and outside was the old regular Muddy! 
So it was all up with Cairo. 

We talked it all over. It wouldn’t do to take to the shore; 
we couldn’t take the raft up the stream, of course. There wam’t 
no way but to wait for dark, and start back in the canoe and 
take the chances. So we slept all day amongst the cotton-wood 
thicket, so as to be firesh for the work, and when we went back 
to the raft about dark the canoe was gone! 

We didn’t say a word for a good while. There wam’t any¬ 
thing to say. We both knowed well enough it was some more 
work of the rattle-snake skin; so what was the use to talk about 
it? It would only look like we was finding fault, and that 
would be bound to fetch more bad luck—and keep on fetching 
it, too, till we knowed enough to keep still. 

By-and-by we talked about what we better do, and found 
there wam’t no way but just to go along down with the raft 
till we got a chance to buy a canoe to go back in. We wam’t 
going to borrow it when there wara’t anybody around, the way 
pap would do, for that might set people after us. 

So we shoved out, after dark, on the raft. 

Anybody that don’t believe yet, that it’s foolishness to 
handle a snake-skin, after all that that snake-skin done for us, 

will believe it now, if they read on and see what more it done 
for us. 



144 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


The place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore, 
But we didn’t see no rafts laying up; so we went along during 
three hours and more. Well, the night got gray, and ruthei 
thick, which is the next meanest thing to fog. You can’t tell 
the shape of the river, and you can’t see no distance. It got to 
be very late and still, and then along comes a steamboat up 
the river. We lit the lantern, and judged she would see it. 
Up-stream boats didn’t generly come close to us; they go 
out and follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs; 
but nights like this they bull right up the channel against the 
whole river. 

We could hear her pounding along, but we didn’t see her 
good till she was close. She aimed right for us. Often they 
do that and try to see how close they can come without touching; 
sometimes the wheel bites off a sweep, and then the pilot sticks 
his head out and laughs, and thinks he’s mighty smart. Well, 
here she comes, and we said she was going to try to shave us; 
but she didn’t seem to be sheering off a bit. She was a big one, 
and she was coming in a hurry, too, looking like a black cloud 
with rows of glow-worms around it; but all of a sudden she 
bulged out, big and scary, with a long row of wide-open furnace 
doors shining like red-hot teeth, and her monstrous bows and 
guards hanging right over us. There was a yell at us, and 
a jingling of bells to stop the engines, a pow-wow of cussing, 
and whistling of steam—and as Jim went overboard on one 
side and I on the other, she come smashing straight through 
the raft. 

I dived—and I aimed to find the bottom, too, for a thirty- 
foot wheel had got to go over me, and I wanted it to have 
plenty of room. I could always stay under water a minute; 
this time I reckon I staid under water a minute and a half. 
Then I bounced for the top in a hurry, for I was nearly busting. 
I popped out to my arm-pits and blowed the water out of my 



SWJMMli^Q ASHORE. 


146 


Qose, and puflfed a bit. Of course there was a booming current; 
and of course that boat started her engines again ten seconds 
after she stopped thena, for they never cared much for raftsmen ; 
so now she was churning along up the river, out of sight in the 
thick weather, though I could hear her. 

1 sung out for Jim about a dozen times, but I didn’t get 
any answer; so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was 



** treading water,” and struck out for shore, shoving it ahead of 
me. But I made out to see that the drift of the current was 
towards the left-hand shore, which meant that I was in a 
crossing ; so 1 changed oflf and went that way. 

It was one of these long, slanting, two-mile crossings j so I 
was a good long time in getting over. I made a safe landing, 
and clum up the bank, I couldn’t see but a little ways, but I 



140 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

went poking along over rough ground for a quarter of a mile or 
more, and then I run across a big old-fashioned double log 
house before I noticed it. I was going to rush by and get 
away, but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howling and 
barking at me, and I knowed better than to move another peg. 



CHAPTER XVII.

about half a minute 
somebody s])oke oat 
of a window, without 
putting his head out, 
and says: 

“Be done, boys I 
Who’s there ? ” 

I says: 

“ It’s me.” 

“ Who’s me ? ” 

“ George Jackson, 

61 T« 

“ What do you 
want ?” 

“ I don’t want no¬ 
thing, sir. I only want 
to go along by, but 


the dogs won’t let me.” 
“What are you prowling around here this time of night, 
for—hev ? ” 


“ I wam’t prowling around, sir; I fell overboard oflf of the 
steamboat.” 


“Oh, you did, did you? Strike a light there, somebody. 
V^Tiat did you say your name was ? ” 


!• 2 


U8 THE ADVENTUREci OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

George Jackson, sir. I’m only a boy.” 

“ Look here; if you’re telling the truth, you needn’t be 
afraid—nobody ’ll hurt you. But don’t try to budge; stand 
right where you are. Rouse out Bob and Tom, some of yon, 
and fetch the guns. George Jackson, is there anybody with 
you?” 

“No, sir, nobody.” 

I heard the people stirring around in the house, now, and 
see a light. The man sung out: 

“Snatch that light away, Betsy,you old fool—ain’t you got 
any sense? Put it on the floor behind the front door. Boh, 
if you and Tom are ready, take your places,” 

“All ready.” 

“ Now, George Jackson, do you know the Shepherdsons?” 

“ No, sir—I never heard of them.” 

“ Well, that may be so, and it mayn’t. Now, all ready. 
Step forward, George Jackson. And mind, don’t you hurry- 
come mighty slow. If there’s anybody with you, let him keep 
back—if he shows himself he’ll be shot. Come along, now. 
Come slow; push the door open, yourself—just enough to 
squeeze in, d’ you hear ? ” 

I didn’t huny, 1 couldn’t if I’d a wanted to. 1 took one 
slow step at a time, and there warn’t a sound, only I thought I 
could hear my heart. The dogs were as still as the humans, 
but they followed a little behind me. When I got to the three 
log door-steps, I heard them unlocking and unbarring and un¬ 
bolting. I put my hand on the door and pushed it a little and 
a little more, till somebody said, “ There, that’s enough—put 
your head in.” I done it, but I judged they would take it off. 

The candle was on the floor, and there they all was, looking 
at me, and me at them, for about a quarter of a minute. Three 
big men with guns pointed at me, which made me wince, I tell 
you ; the oldest, gray and about sixty, the other two thirty of 



an evening call. 


14» 


moie—all of them fine and handsome—and the sweetest old 
gray-headed lady, and back of her two young women which I 
couldn’t see right well. The old gentleman says: 

« There—I reckon it’s all right. Come in.” 

As soon as I was in, the old gentleman he locked the door 


and barred it and bolted it, and told the young men to come in 
with their guns, and they all went in a big parlour that had a 
new rag carpet on the floor, and got together in a comer that 
was out of range of the front windows—there warn’t none on 
the side. They held the candle, and took a good look at me, 
and all said, “ Why he ain’t a Shepherdson—no, there ain’t any 
Shepherdson about him.” Then the old man said he hoped I 
wouldn’t mind being searched for arms, because he didn’t mean 
no harm by it—it was only to make sure. So he didn’t pry 
into my pockets, but only felt outside with his hands, and said 
it was all right. He told me to make myself easy and at home, 
and tell all about myself; but the old lady says: 

“ Why bless you, Saul, the poor thing’s as wet as he can 
be; and don’t you reckon it may be he’s hungry ? ” 

“ True for you, Kachel—I forgot.” 

So the old lady says: 

“Betsy” (this was a nigger woman), “you fly around and 
get him something to eat, as quick as you can, poor thing j and 
one of yon girls go and wake up Buck and tell him— Oh, 
here he is himself. Buck, take this little stranger and get the 
wet clothes off from him and dress him up in some of yours 


that’s dry.” 

Buck looked about as old as me—thirteen or fourteen or 
along there, though he was a little bigger than me. He hadn’t 
on anything but a shirt, and he was very frowsy-headed. He 
come in gaping and digging one fist into his eyes, and he was 
dragging a gun along with the other one. He says; 

** Ain’t they no Shepherdsons around ? ” 



160 TUB ADVENTURBS OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

They said, no, ’twas a false alarm. 

“Well,” he says, “ if they’d a ben some, I reckon I’d a got 
one.” 

They all laughed, and Bob says: 



“ Why, Buck, they might have scalped us all, you’ve been 
BO slow in coming.” 

“Well, nobody come after me, and it ain’t right. I’m 
always kep’ down ; I don’t get no show.” 

“Never mind, Buck, my boy,” says the old man, “you’ll 



161 


the farm in arkansaw. 


have show enough, aU in good time, don’t you fret about that. 
G-o ’long with you now, and do as your mother told you.” 

When we got upstairs to his room, he got me a coarse shirt 
and a roundabout and pants of his, and I put them on. While 
I was at it he asked me what my name was, but before I could 
tell him, he started to telling me about a blue jay and a young 
rabbit he had catched in the woods day before yesterday, and 
he asked me where Moses was when the candle went out. T 
said I didn’t know ; I hadn’t heard about it before, no way. 

“Well, guess,” he says. 

“ How’m I going to guess,” says 1, “ when I never heard 
tell about it before ? ” 

“ But you can guess, can’t you? It’s just as easy.” 

“ 'Which candle?” I says. 

“ Why, any candle,” he says. 

“ I don’t know where he was,” says 1; “ where was he ? ” 

“ Why, he was in the dark! That’s where he was ! ” 

“ Well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me 
for?” 


“ Why, blame it, it’s a riddle, don’t you see ? Say, how 
long are you going to stay here? You got to stay always. 
We can just have booming times—they don’t have no school 
now. Do you own a dog ? I’ve got a dog—and he’ll go in 
the river and bring out chips that you throw in. Do you like 

a 

to comb up, Sundays, and all that kind of foolishness ? You 
bet I don’t, but ma she makes me. Confound these old 
britches, I reckon I’d better put ’em on, but I’d ruther not, it’s 
80 warm. Are yon all ready? All right—come along, old 
boss.” 

Gold com-pone, cold com-beef, butter and butter-milk— 
that is what they had for me down there, and there ain’t nothing 
better that ever I’ve come across yet. Buck and his ma and 
all of them smoked cob pipes, except the nigger woman^ whi<?tl 



162 THE ABVE^iTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


was gone, and the two young women. They all smoked and 
talked, and I eat and talked. The young women had quilta 
around them, and their hair down their backs. They all asked 
me questions, and I told them how pap and me and all the 
family was living on a little farm down at the bottom of Arkan- 
saw, and my sister Alary Ann run off and got married and 
never was heard of no more, and Bill went to hunt them and 
he warn’t heard of no more, and Tom and Alort died, and then 
there warn’t nobody but just me and pap left, and he was just 
trimmed down to nothing, on account of Ms troubles; so when 
he died I took what there was left, because the farm didn’t 
belong to us, and started up the river, deck passage, and fell 
overboard; and that was how I come to be here. So they said 
I could have a home there as long as I wanted it. Then it was 
most daylight, and everybody went to bed, and I went to bed 
with Buck, and when I waked up in the morning, drat it all, 
I had forgot what my name was. So I laid there about an 
hour trying to think, and when Buck waked up, I says: 

“ Can you spell. Buck ? ” 

“ Yes,” he says. 

“ I bet you can’t spell my name,” says I. 

“ I bet you what you dare I can,” says he. 

“ All right,” says I, “ go ahead.” 

“ G-o-r-g-e J-a-x-o-n—there now,” he says. 

“Well,” says I, “you done it, but I didn’t think you could. 
It ain’t no slouch of a name to spell—right off without study¬ 
ing.” 

I set it down, private, because somebody might want wis to 
spell it, next, and so I wanted to be handy with it and rattle it 
off like I was used to it. 

It was a mighty nice family, and a mighty nice house, too. 
I hadn’t seen no house out in the country before that was so nice 
and had so much style. It didn’t have an iron latch on the 



liiTmioR decorations. 


155 


froiit door, nor a wooden one with a buckskin string, but a 
brass knob to turn, the same aa houses in a town. There 
wam’t no bed in the parlour, not a sign of a bed; but lieaps of 
parlours in towns has beds in them. There was a big fireplace 
that was bricked on the bottom, and the bricks was kept clean 
and red by pouring water on them and scrubbing them with 
another brick j sometimes they washed them over with red 
water-paint that they call Spanish-brown, same as they do in 
town. They had big brass dog-irons that could hold up a saw- 
log. There was a clock on the middle of the mantel-piece, 
with a picture of a town painted on the bottom half of the glass 
front, and a round place in the middle of it for the sun, and 
you could see the pendulum swing behind it. It was beautiful 
to hear that clock tick; and sometimes when one of these 
peddlers bad been along and scoured her up and got her in 
good shape, she would start in and strike a hundred and fifty 
before she got tuckered out. They wouldn’t took any money 
for her. 


Well, there was a big ontlandish parrot on each side of the 
clock, made out of something like chalk, and painted up gaudy. 
By one of the parrots was a cat made of crockery, and a crockery 
dog by the other; and when you pressed down on them they 
squeaked, but didn’t open their mouths nor look different nor 
interested. They squeaked through underneath. There was 
a couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out behind those 
things. On a table in the middle of the room was a kind of a 


lovely crockery basket that had apples and oranges and peaches 
and grapes piled up in it, which was much redder and yellower 
and prettier than real ones is, but they wam’t real because you 
could see where pieces had got chipped off and showed the 
white chalk or whatever it was, underneath. 

This table had a cover made out of beautiful oil-cloth, with 
a rea and blue spread-eagle painted on it, and a painted border 



164 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


all around. It come all the way from Philadelphia, they said, 
There was some books too, piled up perfectly exact, on eacli 
comer of the table. One was a big family Bible, fnll of pic¬ 
tures. One was “Pilgrim’s Progress,” about a man that left 
his family it didn’t say why. I read considerable in it nowand 
then. The statements was interesting, but tough. Another 
was “ Friendship’s Offering,” full of beautiful stuff and poetry; 
but I didn’t read the poetry. Another was Henry Clay’s 
Speeches, and another was Dr. Gunn’s Family Medicine, which 
told you all about what to do if a body was sick or dead. There 
was a Hymn Book, and a lot of other books. And there was 
nice split-bottom chairs, and perfectly sound, too—not bagged 
down in the middle and busted, like an old basket. 

They had pictures hung on the walls—mainly Washingtonp 
and Lafayettes, and battles, and Highland Marys, and one 
called “ Signing the Declaration.” There was some that the}’ 
called crayons, which one of the daughters which was dead 
made her own self when she was only fifteen years old. They 
was different from any pictures I ever see before; blacker, 
mostly, than is common. One was a woman in a slim black 
dress, belted small under the arm-pits, with bulges like a cab¬ 
bage in the middle of the sleeves, and a large black scoop- 
shovel bonnet with a black veil, and white slim ankles crossed 
about with black tape, and very wee black slippers, like a chisel, 
and she was leaning pensive on a tombstone on her right elbow, 
under a weeping willow, and her other hand hanging down her 
side holding a white handkerchief and a reticule, and under¬ 
neath the picture it said, “ Shall 1 Never See Thee More Alas ? 
Another one was a young lady with her hair all combed up 
straight to the top of her head, and knotted there in front of a 
comb like a chair-back, and she was crying into a handkerchief 
and had a dead bird laying on its back in her other hand with 
its heels up, and underneath the picture it said, “ I Shall Never 



INTERIOR DECORATIONS. 


166 


Hear Tlij Sweet Chirrup More Alas! ” There was one where a 
young lady was at a window looking up at the moon, and tears 
running down her cheeks; and she had an open letter in one hand 
with black sealing-wax showing on one edge of it, and she was 
mashing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth, and under¬ 



neath the picture it said, « And Art Thou Gone Yes Thou Art 
Gone Alas! ” These was all nice pictures, I reckon, but I didn’t 
somehow seem to take to them, because if ever I was down a 
little, they always give me the fan-tods. Everybody was sorry 
•he died, because she had laid out a lot more of these pictures 











1D8 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


to do, and a body could see by what she had done what the^ 
had lost. But I reckoned, that with her disposition, she waa 
having a better time in the grave-yard. She was at work on 
what they said was her greatest picture when she took sick, 
and every day and every night it was her prayer to be allowed 
to live till she got it done, but she never got the chance. It 
was a picture of a young woman in a long white gown, standing 
on the rail of a bridge all ready to jump oflf, with her hair all 
down her back, and looking up to the moon, with the tears 
running down her face, and she had two arms folded across her 
breast, and two arms stretched out in front, and two more 
reaching up towards the moon—and the idea was, to see 
which pair would look best and then scratch out all the other 
arms; but, as I was saying, she died before she got her mind 
made up, and now they kept this picture over the head of the 
bed in her room, and every time her birthday come they hung 
flowers on it. Other times it was hid with a little curtain. 
The young woman in the picture had a kind of a nice sweet 
face, but there was so many aims it made her look too spidery, 
seemed to me. 

This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive, and 
used to paste obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suf¬ 
fering in it out of the ‘ Presbyterian Observer,’and write poetry 
after them out of her own head. It was very good poetry. 
This is what she WTote about a boy by the name of Stephen 
Dowling Bots that fell down a well and was drownded :. 

Odd to Stepukn Dowling Both, Deo'd. 

And did young Stephen sicken, 

And did young Stephen die P 
And did the ^d hearts thicken, 

And did the mourners cry P 

such was not the fate of 
Young Stephen Dowling Bote j 


STEPHEN DOW LI NO BOTS. 


167 


Though sad hearts round him thickened, 
Twas not from sicknees’ shots. 

No whooping-cough did rack his frame, 
Nor measles drear, with spots: 

Not these impaired the sacred name 
Of Stephen Dowling lk)ta. 



Despised love struck not with woo 
That head of curlj knots, 

Nor stomach troubles laid him low. 
Yous|: Stephen Dowling Bote. 


158 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN 

Oh DO. Then list with tearful era, 

"Whilst I his fate do tell. 

His soul did from this cold world fly, 

By falling down a well. 

They got bioi out and emptied him; 

Alas it was too late ; 

His spirit was gone for to sport aloft 
In the realms of the good and gi eat. 

If Emmeline Grangerford could make poetry like that 
before she was fourteen, there ain’t no telling what she could 
a done by-and-by. Buck said she could rattle off poetry like 
nothing. She didn’t ever have to stop to think. He said she 
would slap down a line, and if she couldn’t find anything to 
rhyme with it she would just scratch it out and slap down 
another one, and go ahead. She warn’t particular, she could 
write about anything you choose to give her to write about, 
just so it was sadful. Every time a man died, or a woman 
died, or a child died, she would be on hand with her “ tribute ” 
before he was cold. She called them tributes. The neighbours 
said it was the doctor first, then Emmeline, then the undertaker 
—the undertaker never got in ahead of Emmeline but once, and 
then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead person’s name, which 
was Whistler. She wam’t ever the same, after that; she never 
complained, but she kind of pined away and did not live long. 
Poor thing, many’s the time I made myself go up to the little 
room that used to be hers and get out her poor old scrap-book 
and read in it when her pictures had been aggravating me and 
I bad soured on her a little. I liked all that family, dead one# 
and all, and warn’t going to let anything come between us. 
Poor Emmeline made poetry about all the dead people when 
she was alive, and it didn’t seem right that there warn’t nobody 
to make some about her, now she was gone; so I tried to sweat 
out a verse or two myself, but I couldn’t seem to make it go, 



169 


A TIN PAN PIANO. 

iomehow. They kept Emmelitie’s room trim and nice and all 
the things fixed in it just the way she liked to have U>em when 
she was alive, and nobody ever slept there. The old lady took 
care of the room herself, though there was plenty of niggers, 
and she sewed there a good deal and read her Bible there, 

mostly. . 

Well, as 1 was saying about the parlour, there was beautitul 

curtains on the windows: white, with pictures painted on them, 
of castles with vines all down the wails, and cattle coming down 
to drink. There was a little old piano, too, that had tin pans 
in it, I reckon, and nothing was ever so lovely as to hear the 
young ladies sing, “The Last Link is Broken ” and play “The 
Battle of Prague ” on it. The walls of all the rooms was plas¬ 
tered, and most had carpets on the floors, and the whole house 

was whitewashed on the outside. 

It was a double house, and the big open place betwixt them 
was roofed and floored, and sometimes the table was set there 
in the middle of the day, and it was a cool, comfortable place. 
Nothing couldn’t be better. And wam’t the cooking good, 
and just bushels of it too! 



THE HOUSE. 





CHAPTER XVIII.


GliANGEKP'OKD was 
a gentlemau, you see. 
lie was a gentlemau 
all over; and so was 
his family. He was 
well born, as the say¬ 
ing is, and that’s worth 
as much in a man as 
it is in a horse, so the 
Widow Douglass said, 
and nobody ever de¬ 
nied that she was of 
the first aristocracy in 
our town; and pap he 
always said it, too, 
though he wam’t no 
more quality than a 
COL. GRANfiERKORD. uiud-cat, liimself. Col. 

Grangerford was very tall and very slim, and bad a darkish-paly 
complexion, not a sign of red in it anywheres; he was clean- 
sbaved every morning, all over his thin face, and he had the 
thinnest kind of lips, and the thinnest kind of nostrils, and a 
high nose, and heavy eyebrows, and the blackest kind of eyes, 
sunk 80 deep back that they seemed like they was looking out 





COLONEL GHANQERFOni). 


101 


of caverns at yon, as you may say. His forehead was high, and 
his hair was black and straight, and hung to his shou Iders. Hi s 
bands was long and thin, and every day of his life he put on a 
clean shirt and a full suit from head to foot made out of linen 
80 white it hurt your eyes to look at it; and on Sundays he 
wore a blue tail-coat with brass buttons on it. He carried a 
mahogany cane with a silver bead to it. There warn’t no 
frivolishness about him, not a bit, and he warn’t ever loud. He 
was as kind as he could be—you could feel that, you know, and 
so you had confidence. Sometimes he smiled, and it was good 
to see but when he straightened himself up like a liberty-polei’ 
and the lightning begun to flicker out from under his eyebrows 
you wanted to climb a tree first, and find out what the rnatterl 
was afterwards. He didn’t ever have to tell anybody to mind 
their manners—everybody was always good-maunered where he 
was. Everybody loved to have him around, too ; he was sun¬ 
shine most always—I mean he made it seem like goofl weather. 
When he turned into a cloud-bank it was awful dark for a half 
a minute and that was enough; there wouldn’t nothing go 
wrong again for a week. 

When him and the old lady come down in the morning, all 
the family got up out of their chairs and give them good-day, 
and didn’t set down again till they had set down. Then Tom 
and Bob went to the sideboard where the decanters was, and 
mixed a glass of bitters and handed it to him, and he held it in 
his hand and waited till Tom’s and Bob’s was mixed, and then 
they bowed and said, “ Our duty to you, sir, and madam ; ” and 
they bowed the least bit in the world and said thank you, and 
60 they drank, all three, and Bob and Tom poured a spoonful of 
water on the sugar and the mite of whisky or apple brandy in 
the bottom of their tumblers, and give it to me and Buck, and 
we drapk to the old people too. 

Bob was the oldest, and Tom next. Tall, beautiful men 


162 rnv. ATiVF.yTjrnF.s of nucKLFTiFnnY Fiyy. 


inth very broad shoulders and brown faces, and long black bait 
and black eyes. They dressed in white linen from head to foot, 
like the old gentleman, and wore broad Panama hats. 

Then there was Miss Charlotte, she was twenty-five, and tall 
and proud and grand, but as good as she could be, when she 
wam’t stirred up; but when she was, she had a look that would 
make you wilt in your tracks, like her father. She was beau¬ 
tiful. 

So was her sister. Miss Sophia, but it was a different kind. 
She was gentle and sweet, like a dove, and she was only twenty. 

Each person had their o\vn nigger to wait on them—Buck, 
too. My nigger had a monstrous easy time, because I wam’t 
used to having anybody do anything for me, but Buck’s was on 
the jump most of the time. 

This was all there was of the family, now; but there used 
to be more—three sons; they got killed ; and Emmeline that 
died. 

The old gentleman owned a lot of farms, and over a hundred 
niggers. Sometimes a stack of people would come there, horse¬ 
back, from ten or fifteen mile around, and stay five or six days, 
and have such junketings round about and on the river, and 
dances and picnics in the woods, day-times, and balls at the 
house, nights. These people was mostly kin-folks of the family. 
The men brought their guns with them. It was a handsome 
lot of quality, I tell you. 

There was another clan of aristocracy around there—five or 
six families—mostly of the name of Shepherdson. They was as 
high-toned, and well bom, and rich and grand, as the tribe of 
Graugerfords. The Shepherdsons and the Grangerfords used 
the same steamboat landing, which was about two mile above 
o\\x house; so sometimes when I went up there with a lot ol 
our folks I used to see a lot of the Shepherdsons there, on their 

fine ll0^^e8. 



AllISTOCnA CY. 


One day Buck and me was away out in the woods, hunt¬ 
ing, and heard a horse coming. We was crossing the r<>:nl. 
Buck says; 

“ Quick! Jump for the woods! ” 

We done it, and tl\en peeped down the woods through the 



TOUNO BABNBT 8HBPHERDSOH. 


leaves Pretty soon a splendid young man come galloping 
down the road, settmg his horse easy and looking likefsolLr! 
H had his gun across his pommel. 1 had seen him before. It 
was young Harney Shepherdson. I heard Buck’s gun go off at 
my ear, and Harney’s hat tumbled off from his head. He 




154 THE ADVESTURES OF IIUCKLERERRY FINN. 


grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where we wa? 
hid. But we didn’t wait. We started through the woods on a 
run. The woods warn’t thick, so I looked over my shoulder, to 
dodge the bullet, and twice I seen Harney cover Buck with his 



I reckon, but I couldn’t see. We never stopped running till 
we got home. The old gentleman’s eyes blazed a minute— 
t’was pleasure, mainly, I judged—then his face sort of smoothed 
down, and he says, kind of gentle: 

“ I don’t like that shooting from behind a bush. Why 
didn’t you step into the road, my boy ? ” 

“ The Shepherdsons don’t, father. They always take ad¬ 
vantage.” 

Miss Charlotte she held her head up like a queen while 
Buck was telling his tale, and her nostrils spread and her eyes 
snapped. The two young men looked dark, but never said 
nothing. Miss Sophia she turned pale, but the colour come 
back when she found the man warn't hurt. 

Soon as I could get Buck down by the corn-cribs under the 
trees by ourselves, 1 says: 

“ Did you want to kill him, Buck ? ” 

« Well, I bet I did.” 

“ What did he do to you ? ” 

“ Him ? He never done nothing to me.” 

“ Well, then, what did you want to kill him for? ” 

“ Why, nothing—only it’s on account of the feud.” 

“ What’s a feud ? ” 

“ Why, where was you raised ? Don’t you know what » 
feud is?” 

“ Never heard of it before—tell me about it.” 

“Well,” says Buck, “a feud is this way. A man has a 
quarrel with another man, and kills him ; then that other man’s 
brother kills him ; then the other brothers, on both sides, goes 



FEUDS. 


16 ft 


tor one another; then the coueinn chip in—and by-and-bj 
everybody’s killed off, and there ain't no more feud. But it’s 
kind of slow, and takes a long time.” 

“ Has this one been going on long, Buck ? ” 

“Well, I should reckon! it started thirty year ago, or 



mss OHA.RLOTTB. 


Bom’ers along there. There was trouble ’bout something and 
then a lawsuit to settle it; and the suit went agin one of the 
men, and so he up and shot the man that won the suit—which 
he would naturally do, of course. Anybody would.” 

“ What was the trouble about, Buck ?—land ? ” 

“ I reckon maybe—I don’t know.” 



IU6 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINK. 

“ Well, who done the shooting?—was it a Grangerford or a 
Shepherdson ?” 

“ Laws, how do I know ? it was so long ago.” 

“ Don’t anybody know ? ” 

Oh, yes, pa knows, I reckon, and some of the other old 
folks; but they don’t know now what the row was about in the 
first place.” 

“ Has there been many killed. Buck ? ” 

“ Yes—right smart chance of funerals. But they don’t 
always kill. Pa’s got a few buck-shot in him; but he don’t 
mind it ’cuz he don’t weigh much anyway. Bob’s been carved 
up some with a bowie, and Tom’s been hurt once or twice.” 

“ Has anybody been killed this year, Buck ? ” 

“Yes, we got one and they got one. ’Bout three months 
ago, my cousin Bud, fourteen year old, was riding through the 
woods, on t’other side of the river, and didn't have no weapon 
with him, which was blame’ foolishness, and in a lonesome 
[dace he hears a horse a-coming behind him, and sees old Baldy 
yhepherdson a-linkin’ after him with his gun in bis hand and 
his white hair a-flying in the wind; and ’stead of jumping oif 
and taking to the brush, Bud ’lowed be could outrun him ; so 
they had it, nip and tuck, for five mile or more, the old man a- 
gaining all the time; so at last Bud seen it warn’t any use, so 
he stopped and faced around so as to have the bullet holes in 
front, you know, and the old man he rode up and shot him 
down. But he didn’t git much chance to enjoy his luck, for 
inside of a week our folks laid him out.” 

“ I reckon that old man was a coward. Buck.” 

“ I reckon he yjarn't a coward. Not by a blame’ sight. There 
ain’t a coward amongst them Shepherdsons—not a one. And 
there ain’t no cowards amongst the Grangerfords, either. ^Vhy, 
that old man kep’ up his end in a fight one day, for a half an 
hour, acainst '■hre** Grangerfords, and come out winner. They 



THE fESTAMENt. 


was all a-horsebacl<; he lit oflf of his horse and got behind a little 
wood-pile, and kep’ his horse before him to stop the bullets ; 
but the Grangerfords staid on their horses and capered around 
the old man, and peppered away at him, and he pepjjered away 
at them. Him and his horse both went home pretty leaky and 
crippled, but the Grangerfords had to be fetched home—and 
one of ’em was d' ad, and another died the next day. No, sir, 
if a body’s out hunting for cowards, he don’t want to fool away 
any time amongst them Shephersons, becuz they don’t breed any 
of that kind.'' 

Next Sunday we all went to church, about three mile, 
everybody a-horseback. The men took their guns along, so did 
Buck, and kept them between their knees or stood them handy 
against the wall. The Shepherdsons done the same. It was 
pretty ornery preaching—all about brotherly love, and such-like 
tiresomeness; but everybody said it was a good sermon, and 
they all talked it over going borne, and had such a powerful lot 
to say about faith, and good works, and free grace, and prefore- 
ordestination, and I don’t know what all, that it did seem to 
me to be one of the roughest Sundays I bad run across yet. 

About an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around, 
some in their chairs and some in their rooms, and it got to be 
pretty dull. Buck and a dog was stretched out on the grass in 
the sun, so)iod asleep. I went up to our room, and judged I 
would take a nap myself. I found that sweet Miss. Sophia 
standing in her door, which was next to ours, and she took me 
in her room and shut the door very soft, and asked me if f 
liked her, and I said I did ; and she asked me if I would do 
something for her and not tell anybody, and I said I would. 
Then she said she’d forgot her Testament, and left it in the 
seat at church, between two other books, and would I slip out 
- quiet and go there and fetch it to her, and not say nothing to 
nobody. I said I would. So 1 slid out and slipped off up the 



168 THE AjDVENTUEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN 



road, and there warn’t anybody at the church, except maybe a 
hog or two, for there warn’t any lock on the door, and hogs 
likes a puncheon floor in summer-time because it’s cool. If 
you notice, most folks don’t go to church only when they’ve got 
to; but a hog is different. 


Says I to myself something’s up—it ain’t natural for a girl 
to be in such a sweat about a Testament; so I give it a shake, 
and out drops a little piece of paper with Half-^ast-two'* 
wrote on it with a pencil. I ransacked it, but couldn’t find 
anything else. I couldn’t make anything out of that, so I put 
the paper in the book again, and when 1 got home and up- 


“AND ASKED MB IK 1 LIKED HEB. 









WATEll-MOCCASINSr 


1«9 


stairs, there was Miss Sophia Id her door waiting for me. She 
pulled me in and shut the door; then she looked in the Testa¬ 
ment till she found the paper, and as soon as she read it she 
looked glad; and before a body could think, she grabbed me 
and give me a 

world, and not to tell anybody. She was mighty red in the 
face, for a minute, and her eyes lighted up, and it made her 
powerful pretty, I was a good deal astonished, but when I got 
my breath I asked her what the paper was about, and she 
asked roe if I bad read it, and I said ** no,” and she asked me if I 


squeeze, and said I was the best boy in the 


could read writing, and I told her “ No, only coarse-hand,” and 
then she said the paper wam’t anything hut a book-mark to 
Iceep her place, and I might go and play now. 

I went off down to the river, studying over this thing, and 
pretty soon I noticed that my nigger was following along be- 
liind. When we was out of sight of the house, he looked back 
and around a second, and then comes a-running, and says:— 

“ Mars Jawge, if you’ll come down into de swamp, I’ll show 
you a whole stack o’ water-moccasins.” 


Thinks I, that’s mighty curious; he said that yesterday. 

He oughter know a body don’t love water-moccasins enough to 

go around hunting for them. - What is he up to any way ? Sol 
says— 


“ All right, trot ahead.” 


I followed a half a mile, then he struck out over the swamp 
and waded ankle deep as much as another half-mile. We come 
to a little flat piece of land which was dry and very thick with 
trees and bushes and vines, and he says— 

j in dahjjist a few steps, Mars Jawge, 

dah s whah dey is. Vs seed’m befo*, I don’t k’yer to see ’em 
no mo*.” 


Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty 
Boon the trees hid Mm. I poked into the place a-ways, and 



170 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


come to a little open patch as big as a bedroom, all hung around 
with vines, and found a man laying there asleep—and by jings 
it was my old Jim ! 

I waked him up, and I reckoned it was going to be a grand 
surprise to him to see me again, but it warn’t. He nearly 
cried, he was sc glad, but he wam’t surprised. Said he swum 
along behind me, that night, and heard me yell every time, but 
dasn’t answer, because he didn’t want nobody to pick him up, 
and take him into slavery again. Says he— 

“ I got hurt a little, en couldn't swim fas’, so I wuz a con- 
sidable ways behine you, towards de las’; when you landed I 
reck’ned I could ketch up wid you on de Ian’ ’doubt havin’ to 
shout at you, but when I see dat house I begin to go slow. I 
’uz off too fur to hear what dey say to you—1 wuz ’fraid o’ de 
dogs—but when it ’uz all quiet agin, I knowed you’s in de 
house, so I struck out for de woods to wait for day. Early in 
de mawnin’ some er de niggers come along, gwyne to de fields, 
en dey tuck me en showed me dis place, whah de dogs can’t 
track me on accounts o’ de water, en dey brings me truck to 
eat every night, en tells me how you’s a gitt’n along. 

“ Why didn’t you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner, 

Jim ? ” 

“ Well, ’twarn’t no use to ’sturb you, Huck, tell we could do 
suinfn—but we’s all right, now. I ben a-buyin’ pots en pans 
en vittles, as I got a chanst, en a patcbin’ up de raf’, nights, 

when-” 

“ What raft, Jim ? ” 

“ Our ole raf’.” 

“ You mean to say our old raft wam’t smashed all to 

flinders?” ^ 

“ No, she warn’t. She was tore up a good deal—one en of 

her was—but dey warn’t no great harm done, on’y our traps 

was mos’ all los’. Ef we hadn’ dive’ so deep en swum so fur 



RECOVERINO THE RAFT. 


in 


under water, en de night had’n ben so dark, en we wam’t so 
sk’yerd, en ben sich punkin-heads, as de sayin’ is, we’d a seed 
de raf. But it’s jis’ as well we didn’t, ’kase now she’s all fixed 
up agin mos’ as good as new, en we’s got a new lot o’ stuff, too, 
in de place o’ what ’uz los’.” 

“ \^^y, how did you get hold of the raft again, Jim—did 
you catch her ? ” 

“ How I gwyne to ketch her, en I out in de woods ? No, 
some er de niggers foun* her ketched on a snag, along heah in 
de ben’, en dey hid her in a crick, ’mongst de willows, en dey 
wuz so much jawin’ ’bout which un ’um she b’long to de mos’, 
dat I come to heah ’bout it pooty soon, so I ups en settles de 
trouble by tellin’ ’um she don’t b’long to none uv um, but to 
you en me; en I ast’m if dey gwyne to grab a young white 
genlman’s propaty, en git a hid’n for it ? Den I gin ’m ten 
cents apiece, en dey ’uz mighty well satisfied, en wisht some 
mo raf 8 ud come along en make’m rich agin. Dey’s mighty 
good to me, dese niggers is, en whatever I wants’m to do fur 
me, I doan’ have to ast ’m twice, honey. Dat Jack’s a good 
nigger, en pooty smart.” 


Yes, he is. He ain’t ever told me you was here; told 
me to come, and he’d show me a lot of water-moccasins. If 
anything happens, he ain’t mixed up in it. He can say he 
never seen us together, and it’U be the truth.” 


I don’t want to talk much about the next day. I reckon 
I'll cut It pretty short. I waked up about dawn, and was agoing 
to turn over and go to sleep again, when I noticed how still it 
was—didn’t seem to be anybody stirring. That wam’t usual. 
Next I noticed that Buck was up and gone. Well, I gets up, 
a wondering, and goes downstairs—nobody around ; everything 
as still as a mouse. Just the same outside; thinks I, what 

oes it mean ? Down by the wood-pile I comes across my Jack 
and says: 



172 THI^ ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ What’s it all about ? ” 

Says he: 

“ Don’t you know, ]\Iars Jawge ? ” 

“ No,” says I, “ I don’t.” 

“ Well, den, Miss Soi>hia’8 run off! ’deed she has. She run 
off in de night, sometime—nobody don’t know jis’when—run 
off to git married to dat young Harney Shepherdson, you know 
—leastways, so dey ’spec. De fambly foun’ it out, ’bout half an 
hour ago—maybe a little mo’—en’ I ieW you dey wam’t no 
time los’. Sich another hurryin’ up guns en bosses you never 
see! De women folks has gone for to stir up de relations, en ole 
Mars Saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de river 
road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him ’fo’ he kin 
git acrost de river wid Miss Sophia. I reck’n dey’s gwyne to be 
mighty rough times.” 

“ Buck went off ’thout waking me up.” 

“ Well, I reck’n he did / Dey warn’t gwyne to mix you up 
in it. Mars Buck he loaded up his gun en ’lowed he’s gwyne 
to fetch home a Shepherdson or bust. Well, dey’ll be plenty un 
’m dah, I reck’n, en you bet you he’ll fetch one ef he gits a 
chanst.” 

I took up the river road as hard as I could put. By-and-by 
I begin to hear guns a good ways off. When I come in sight 
of the log store and the wood-pile where the steamboats land, I 
worked along under the trees and brush till I got to a good 
place, and then I dumb up into the forks of a cotton-wood that 
was out of reach, and watched. There was a wood-rank four 
foot high, a little ways in front of the tree, and first I was 
going to hide behind that; but maybe it was luckier I didn't. 

There was four or five men cavorting around on their 
horses in the open place before the log store, cussing and yelling, 
and trying to get at a couple of young chaps that was behind 
the wood-rank alongside- of the steamboat landing—but they 



THE WOOD I’lLE. 


1/Jj 


couldn’t come it. Every time one of them showed himself on 
the river side of the wood-pile he got shot at. Ihe two boys 
was squatting back to back behind the pile, so they could 
watch both ways. 

By-and-by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling. 
They started riding towards the .store; then up gets one of the 
boys, draws a steady bead over the wood-rank, and drops one of 





' 


BEHIND THE WOOD BILE.' 


them out of his saddle. All the men jumped off of their horses 
and grabbed the hurt one and started to carry him to the store; 
and that minute the two boys started on the run. They got 
half-way to the tree I was in before the men noticed. Then 
the men see them, and jumped on their horses and took out after 
them. They gained on the boys, but it didn’t do no good, the 
boys had too good a start; they got to the wood-pile that was 
in front of my tree, and slipped iu behind it, and so they had 






174 TUB ADVENTUnES OF IlUCKLEliEliRT FINN. 


the bulge on the men again. One of the boys was Buck, and 
the other was a slim young chap about nineteen years old. 

The men ripped around awhile, and then rode away. 
As soon as they was out of sight, I sung out to Buck and told 
him. He didn’t know what to make of my voice coming out of 
the tree, at first. He was awful surprised. He told me to 
watch out sharp and let him know when the men came in sight 
again ; said they was up to some devilment or other—wouldn’t 
be gone long. I wished I was o\it of that tree, but I dasn’t 
come down. Buck begun to cry and rip, and ’lowed that him 
and his cousin .Toe (that was the other young chap) would 
make up for this day, yet. He said his father and his two 
brothers was killed, and two or three of the enemy. Said the 
Sbepherdsons laid for them, in ambush. Buck said his father 
and brothers ought to waited for their relations—the Shepherd- 
sons was too strong for them. I asked him what was become 
of young Harney and Miss Sophia. He said they’d got across 
the river and was safe. I was glad of that; but the way Buck 
did take on because he didn’t manage to kill Harney that day 
he shot at him—I hain’t ever heard anything like it. 

All of a sudden, bang ! bang! bang! goes three or four gurs 
—the men had slipped around through the woods and come in 
from behind without their horses ! The boys jumped for the 
river—both of them hurt—and as they swum down the current 
the men run along the bank shooting at them and singing out, 
“ Kill them, kill them ! ” It made me so sick I most fell out 
of the tree. I ain’t agoing to tell all that happened—it would 
make me sick again if I was to do that. I wished I hadn’t ever 
come ashore that night, to see such things. I ain’t ever going 
to get shut of them—lots of times I dream about them. 

I staid in the tree till it begun to get dark, afiaid to come 
down. Sometimes I heard guns away off in the woods; and 
twice I seen little gangs of men gallop past the log store with 



•‘/S’ DAT YOU. HONEYf' 


17ft 


gfuns; so I reckoned the trouble was still Jigoing on. T was 
mighty down-hearted; so I made up my mind I wouldn’t ever 
go anear that house again, because I reckoned I was to blame, 
somehow. I judged that that piece of paper meant that Miss 
Sophia was to meet Harney somewheres at half-past two and 
run ofif; and I judged I ought to told her father about that 
paper and the curious way she acted,and then maybe he would 
a locked her up and this awful mess wouldn’t ever happened. 

WTien I got down out of the tree, I crept along down the 
river bank a piece, and found the two bodies laying in the edge 
of (he water, and tugged at them till I got them ashore; then 
I covered up their faces, and got away as quick a.s I could. I 
cried a little when I was covering up Buck’s face, for he was 
“ig^ty good to me. 


It was just dark, now. I never went near the bouse, but 

struck through the woods and made for the swamp, Jim 

warn t on his island, so I tramped off in a hurry for the crick, 

and crowded through the willows, red-hot to jump aboard and 

get out of that awful country—the raft was gone! My souls, 

but I was scared ! I couldn’t get my breath for most a minute. 

Then I raised a yell, A voice not twenty-five foot from me, says_ 

Good Ian ! is dat you, honey? Doan’ make no noise.” 

It was Jim’s voice—nothing ever sounded so good before. 

I run along the hank a piece and got aboard, and Jim he 

grabbed me and bugged me, he was so glad to see me. He 
says— 


^ “ Laws bless you, chile, I ’uz right down sho* you’s dead 

agm. Jack’s been heah, he say he reck’n you’s ben shot, kase 

you didn come home no mo’; so I’s jes’ dis minute a startin’ 

de mf down towards de mouf er de crick, so’s to be all ready for 

to shove out en leave soon as Jack comes agin en tells me for 

cemrn you w dead. Lawsy. I’s mighty glad to git you back 
agin, honey.” 



176 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

I says— 

“ All right—that’s mighty good; they won’t find me, and 
they’ll think I’ve been killed, and Boated down the river— 
there’s something up there that’ll help them to think so so 
don’t you lose no time, Jim, but just shove off for the big 

water as fast as ever you can.” 

I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and 

out in the middle of the Mississippi. Then we hung up our 
signal lantern, and judged that we was free and safe once more. 
1 hadn’t had a bite to eat since yesterday ; so Jim he got out 
some corn-dodgers and butter-milk, and pork and cabbage, and 
greens—there ain’t nothing in the world so good, when its 
cooked right—and whilst I eat my supper we talked, and had 
a good time. I was powerful glad to get away from the feuds, 
and so was Jim to get away from the swamp. We said there 
wam’t no home like a raft, after all. Other places do seem so 
cramped up and smothery, but a raft don’t. You feel mighty 
free and easy and comfortable on a raft. 


CHAPTER XIX.

."T wo or three days and 
nights went by; I 
reckon I might say 
they swum by, they 
slid along so quiet 
and smooth and lovely. 
Here is the way we 
put in the time. It 
was a monstrous big 
river down there— 
sometimes a mile and 
a half wide; we run 
nights, and laid up 
and hid day-times; 
soon as night was most 
gone, we stopped navi¬ 
gating and tied up— 
nearly always in the 
dead water under a 
tow-head; and then 
cut young cotton-woods and willows and hid the raft with them. 
Then we set out the lines. Next we slid into the river and had 
a swim, so as to freshen up and cool off; then we set down on 
the sandy bottom where the water was about knee-deep, and 




UIDIKO DAT-TIUBS. 


N 




178 TUB ADVENTVRES OF JIVCKLFBEFFY FINN. 


watched the daylight come. Not a sound anywheres—perfectly 
still—just like the whole world was asleep, only sometimes the 
bull frogs a-clattering, maybe. The first thing to see, looking 
away over the water, was a kind of dull line-—that was the 
woods on t’other side—you couldn’t make nothing else out; 
then a pale place in the sky; then more paleness, spreading 
around ; then the river softened up, away off, and wam’t black 
any more, but gray ; you could see little dark spots drifting 
along, ever so far away—trading scows, and such things; and 
long black streaks—rafts; sometimes you could hear a sweep 
screaking ; or jumbled up voices, it was so still, and sounds 
come so far; and hy-and-by you could see a streak on the 
water which you kmAv by the look of the streak that there’s 
a snag there in a swift current which breaks on it and 
makes that streak look tha‘ way ; and you see the mist curl up 
off of the water, and the east reddens up, and the river, and 
you make out a log cabin in the edge of the woods, away on the 
bank on t’other side of the river, being a wood-yard, likely, and 
piled by them cheats so you can throw a dog through it any¬ 
wheres ; then the nice breeze springs up, and comes fanning 
you from over there, so cool and fresh, and sweet to smell, on 
account of the woods and the flowers ; but sometimes not that 
way, because they’ve left dead fish laying around, gars, and 
such, and they do get pretty rank ; and next you’ve got the 
full day, and everything smiling in the sun, and the song-birds 
just going it! 

A little smoke couldn’t be noticed, now, so we would take 
some fish off of the lines and cook up a hot breakfast. And 
afterwards we would watch the lonesomeness of the river, and 
kind of lazy along, and by-and-by lazy off to sleep. Wake up, 
by-and-by, and look to see what done it, and maybe see a 
steamboat, coughing along up stream, so far off towards the 
other side you couldn’t tell nothing ahout her only whether she 



179 


TYING VP DAY-TIMES. 

was stem-wheel or side-wheel; then for about an hour there 
wouldn’t be nothing to hear nor nothing to see—^nat solid 
lonesomeness. Next you’d see a raft sliding by, away off yonder, 
and maybe a galoot on it chopping, because they’re most always 
doing it on a raft; you’d see the axe flash, and come down }OU 
don’t hear nothing; you see that axe go up again, and by the 
time it's above the man’s head, then you hear the kchunh! it 
had took all that time to come over the water. So we would 
put in the day, lazying around, listening to the stillnf*ss. Once 
there was a thick fog, and the rafts and things that went by 
was beating tin pans so the steamboats wouldn t run over llu'in. 

A scow or a raft went by so close we could hear them talking 
and cussing and laughing—heard them plain ; but we could n t 
see no sign of them; it made you feel crawly, it was like spirits 
carrying on that way in the air. Jim said he believed it was 
spirits; but I says: 

“ No, spirits wouldn’t say, * dem the dern fog.’ ” 

Soon as it was night, out we shoved ; when we got her out 
to about the middle, we let her alone, and let her float where- 
ever the current wanted her to; then we lit the pipes, and 
dangled our legs in the water and talked about all kinds of 
things—we was always naked, day and night, whenever the 
mosquitoes would let us—the new clothes Buck’s folks made 
for me was too good to be comfortable, and besides I didn’t go 
much on clothes, nohow. 

Sometimes we’d have that whole river all to ourselves for the 
longest time. Yonder was the banks and the islands, across 
the water ; and maybe a spark—which was a candle in a cabin 
window—and sometimes on the water you could see a spark or 
two—on a raft or a scow, you know; and maybe you could bear 
a fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crafts. Its 
lovely to live on a raft. We had the sky, up there, all speckled 
with atars, and we used to lay on our backs and look up at 

S9 


180 TUB ABYBKTUItES OF IlTrCKLBBBnjlY FINN. 

them, and discuss about whether they was made, or only just 
happened Jim he allowed they was made, but I allowed they 
happened; I judged it would have took too long to maifee so 
many. Jim said the moon could a laid them ; well, that looked 
kind of reasonable, so I didn’t say nothing against it, because 
I’ve seen a frog lay most as many, so of course it could be done. 

e used to watch the stars that fell, too, and see them streak 

down, Jim allowed they’d got spoiled and was hove out of the 
nest. 

Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping 
along in the dark, and now and then she would belch a whole 
world of sparks up out of her chimbleys, and they would rain 
down in the river and look awful pretty; then she would turn a 
comer and her lights would wink out and her pow-wow shut off 
and leave the river still again ; and by-and-by her waves would 
get to us, a long time after she was gone, and joggle the raft a 
bit, and after that you wouldn’t hear nothing for you couldn’t 
tell how long, except maybe frogs or something. 

After midnight the people on shore went to bed, and then 
for two or three hours the shores was black—no more sparks in 
the cabin windows. These sparks was our clock—the first one 
that showed again meant morning was coming, so we hunted a 
place to hide and tie up, right away. 

One morning about day-break, I found a canoe and crossed 
over a chute to the main shore—it was only two hundred yards 
—and paddled about a mile up a crick amongst the cypress 
woods, to see if I couldn’t get some berries. Just as I was pass¬ 
ing a place where a kind of cow-path crossed the crick, here 
comes a couple of men tearing up the path as tight as they 
could foot it. I thought I was a goner, for whenever anybody 
was after anybody I judged it was Tne—or maybe Jim. I was 
about to dig out from there in a hurry, but they was pretty close 
to me then, and sung out and begged me to save their lives— 



“ DOGS A-COMiy^G." 


181 


said they hadn’t been doing nothing, and was being chased for 
it— said there was men and dogs a-coming. They wanted to 

jump right in, but I says— 

“Don’t you do it. I don’t hear the dogs and horses yet; 
you’ve got time to crowd through the brush and get up the 



crick a little ways; then you take to the water and wade down 
to me and get in—that’ll throw the dogs off the scent.” 

They done it, and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our 
tow-head, and in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs 
and the men away off, shouting. We heard them come along 



182 THE AEVENrUKES OF HVCKLEBEHliY FINE. 


towards the crick, but couldn’t see them ; they seemed to stop 
and fool around a while; then, as we got further and further 
away all the time, we couldn’t hardly hear them at all; by the 
time we had left a mile of woods behind us and struck the river, 
everything was quiet, and we paddled over to the tow-head and 
hid in the cotton-woods and was safe. 

One of these fellows was about seventy, or upwards, and had 
a bald head and very gray whiskers. He had an old battered- 
up slouch hat on, and a greasy blue woollen shirt, and ragged 
old blue jeans britches stuffed into his boot tops, and home- 
knit galluses—no, he only had one. He had an old long-tailed 
blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons, flung over his arm, and 
both of them had big fat ratty-looking carpet-bags. 

The other fellow was about thirty and dressed about as 
ornery. AfTsr breakfast we all laid off and talked, and the first 
thing that come out was that these chaps didn’t know one 
another. 

“ What got you into trouble ? ” says the baldhead to t’other 
chap. 

“ Well, I’d been selling an article to take the tartar off the 
teeth—and it does take it off, too, and generly the enamel 
along with it—but I staid about one night longer than I ought 
to, and was just in the act of sliding out when I ran across you 
on the trail this side of town, and you told me they were 
coming, and begged me to help you to get off. So I told you 
I was expecting trouble myself and would scatter out with you. 
That’s the whole yarn—what’s youm ? ” 

“Well, I’d ben a-runnin’a little temperance revival thar, 
bout a week, and was the pet of the women-folks, big and little, 
for I was makin’ it mighty warm for the rummies, I tell you, 
and takin’ as much as five or six dollars a night—ten cents a 
head, children and niggers free—and business a growin’ ail the 
time j when somehow or another a little report got around, last 



HVNNI^O A TEMrEliANCE REVIVAL 



„igl.t, that I had a way of puttin’ in my time with a private 
d, on the sly. A nigger rousted me out th.a morn.n , and 
totl me the people was getherin’ on the quiet with their dog. 
and horses, and they’d be along pretty soon and give me boa 
half an hour’s sUrt, and then run me doum, if they could , an 
if they got me they’d tar and feather me and nde me on a rail, 

sure. I didn’t wait for no breakfast—1 warn’t hungry. 

“ Old man,” says the young one. ‘‘ I reckon we might 

double-team it together; what do you think ? ” 

I ain’t undisposed. What’s your line—mainly ? 

Jour printer, by trade; do a little in patent medicines ; 
theatre-actor—tragedy, you know ; hike a turn at mesmerism 
and phrenology when there’s a chance; teach singing geography 

school for a change ; sling a lecture, sometimes—oh, I do lots 
of things—most anything that comes handy, so it ain t work. 


ii 




What’s your lay ? ” 

“ I’ve done considerble in the doctoring way in my time. 
Layin’ on o’ hands is my best holt—for cancer, and paralysis, 
and sich things ; and I k’n tell a fortune pretty good, when I’ve 
got somebody along to find out the facts for me. Preachin s 
my line, too; and workin’ camp-meetin’s; and missiunaryin’ 

around.” 

Nobody never said anything for a while; then the young 
man hove a sigh and says— 


» Alas!” 

“What ’re you alassin’ about?” says the baldhead. 

“ To think I should have lived to be leading such a life, and 
be degraded dowu into such company.” And he begun to wipe 
the corner of his eye with a rag. 

“ Dem your skin, ain’t the company good enough for you ? * 

says the baldhead, pretty pert and uppish. 

“Yes, it is good enough for me; it’s as good as I deserve ; 
for who fetched me so low, when I was so high? I did myself. 



184 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINR. 

r don’t blame you, gentlemep—far from it; I don’t blame any- 
body. I deserve it all. Let the cold world do its worst; one 
thing I know—there’s a giave somewhere for me. The world 
may go on just as its always done, and take everything from me 
—loved ones, property, everything—but it can’t take that. 



Some day I’ll lie down in it and forget it all, and my poor 
broken heait will be at rest.” He went on a-wiping. 

“ Drot your pore broken heart,” says the baldhead : “what 
ire you heaving your pore broken heart at f’r? We hain’t 
done nothing.” 

“No, I know you haven’t. I ain’t blaming you, gentle- 



TEE DUKE OF BRIBGEWATER. 


186 


men. I brought myself down—yes, I did it myself. It s right 
I should suffer— perfectly right^l don’t make any moan.” 

“ Brought you down from whar ? WTiar was you brought 

down from?” 

“ Ah, you would not believe me; the world never believes 
—let it pass—’tis no matter. The secret of my birth-” 

“ The secret of your birth ? Do you mean to say-” 

“ G-entlemen,” says the young man, very solemn, “ I will 
reveal it to you, for I feel I may have confidence in you. By 
rights I am a duke! ” 

Jim’s eyes bugged out when he heard that; and I reckon 
mine did, too. Then the baldhead says: “ No! you can’t 
mean it ? ” 

“ Yes. My great-grandfather, eldest son of the Duke of 
Bridgewater, fled to this country about the end of the last cen¬ 
tury, to breathe the pure air of freedom; married here, and 
died, leaving a son, his own father dying about the same time. 
The second son of the late duke seized the title and estates— 
the infant real duke was ignored. I am the lineal descendant 
of that infant—I am the rightful Duke of Bridgewater; and 
here am I, forlorn, tom from my high estate, hunted of men, 
despised by the cold world, ragged, worn, heart-broken, and 
degraded to the companionship of felons on a raft! ” 

Jim pitied him ever so much, and so did 1. We tried to 
comfort him, but he said it wam’t much use, he couldn’t be 
much comforted; said if we was a mind to acknowledge him, 
that would do him more good than most anything else ; so we 
said we would, if he would tell us how. He said we ought to 
bow, when we spoke to him, and say “ Your Grace,” or “ My 
Lord,” or “ Your Lordship ”—and he wouldn’t mind it if we 
called him plain Bridgewater,” which he said was a title, 
anyway, and not a name ; and one of us ought to wait on him 
at dinner, and do any little thing for him he wanted done. 



186 THE AHVENTXJEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINS. 


Well, that was all easy, so we done it. All through dinner 
Jim stood around and waited on him, and says, “ Will yo* 
Grace have some o’ dis, or some o* dat ? ” and so on, and a body 
could see it was mighty pleasing to him. 

But the old man got pretty silent, by-and-by—didn’t have 
much"to say, and didn’t look pretty comfortable over all that 
petting that was going on around that duke. He seemed to 
have something on his mind. So, along in the afternoon, he 
says: 

“ Looky here, Bilgewater,” he says, “ I’m nation sorry for 
you, but you ain’t the only person that’s had troubles like that.” 
“ No ? ” 

“ No, you ain’t. You ain’t the only person that’s ben snaked 
down wrongfully out’n a high place.” 

“Alas!” 

“ No, you ain’t the only person that’s had a secret of his 
birth.” And by jings, he begins to cry. 

“Hold! \Miat do you mean?” 

“ Bilgewater, kin I trust you ? ” says the old man, still sort 
of sobbing. 

“ To the bitter death! ” He took the old man by the hand 
and squeezed it, and says, “ The secret of your being : speak ! ” 

“ Bilgewater, I am the late Dauphin ! ” 

You bet you Jim and me stared, this time. Then the duke 

says: 

“ You are what ? ” 

“ Yes, my friend, it is too true—your eyes is lookin’ at this 
very moment on the pore disappeared Dauphin, Looy the 
Seventeen, son of Looy the Sixteen and Marry Antonette.” 

“ You! At your age! No ! You mean you’re the late 
Charlemagne ; you must be six or seven hundred years old, at 
the very least.” 

“ Trouble has done it, Bilgewater, trouble has done it ;• 



THB TROUBLES OF ROYALTY. 


187 


trouble has brung these gray hairs and this premature baldit ude. 
Yes, geutlemen, you see before you, in bUie jeans and misery, 
the wanderin’, exiled, trampled-on, and sufferin’ rightful King 


of France.” 

Well, he cried and took on so, that me and Jim didn t know 
hardly what to do, we was so sorry—and so glad and proud we d 



got him with us, too. So we set in, like we done before with 
the duke, and tried to comfort hvra. But he said it wam’t no 
use, nothing but to be dead and done with it all could do him 
any good; though he said it often made him feel easier and 
better for a while if people treated him according to his rightsi 



188 TKE adventures OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 

ind got down on one knee to speak to him, and always called 
hun “ Your Majesty,” and waited on him first at meals, and 
didn’t set down in his presence till he asked them. So Jim 
and me set to majestying him, and doing this and that and 
t’other for him, and standing up till he told us we might set 
down. This done him heaps of good, and so he got cheerful 
and comfortable. But the duke kind of soured on him, and 
didn’t look a bit satisfied with the way things was going; still, 
the king acted real friendly towards him, and said the duke’s 
great-grandfather and all the other Dukes of Bilgewater was a 
good deal thought of by his father, and was allowed to come to 
the palace considerable ; but the duke staid huify a good while, 
till by-and-by the king says: 

“ Like as not we got to be together a blamed long time, on 
this h-yer raft, Bilgewater, and so what’s the use o* your bein’ 
sour ? It’ll only make things oncomfortable. It ain’t my fault 
I wam’t bom a duke, it ain’t your fault you warn’t bora a king 
—so what’s the use to worry ? Make the best o* things the 
way you find ’em, says I—that’s my motto. This ain’t no bad 
thing that we’ve struck here—plenty grub and an easy life— 
come, give us your hand, Duke, and less all be friends.” 

The duke done it, and Jim and me was pretty glad to see 
it. It took away all the uncomfortableness, and we felt mighty 
good over it, because it would a been a miserable business to 
have any unfriendliness on the raft; for what you want, above 
all things, on a raft, is for everybody to be satisfied, and feel 
riffht and kind towards the others. 

It didn’t take me long to make up my mind that these liars 
warn’t no kings nor dukes, at all, but just low-down humbugs 
and frauds. But I never said nothing, never let on ; kept it to 
myself; it’s the best way; then you don’t have no quarrels, 
and don’t get into no trouble. If they wanted us to call them 
kings and dukes, I hadn’t no objections, ’long as it would keep 



189 


THE TROUBLES OF RbYALTT. 

peace in the family ; and it warn’t no use to tell Jim, so I didn’t 
tell him. If I never learnt nothing else out of pap I learnt 
that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let, 
them have their own way. 






CHAPTER XX.


askod us considerable 
many questions; wanted 
to know wliat we covered 
up the i“aft that way for, 
and laid by in the day¬ 
time instead of running 
—was Jim a runaway 
- nigger? Says I— 

“ Goodness sakes, 
would a runaway nigger 
run south f ” 

No, they allowed he 
wouldn’t. I had to ac¬ 
count for things some 
way, so I says: 

“ i\Iy folks was living 
in Pike County, in Mis- 
TME RAFT. pouri, whcre I was bom, 

and they all died off but me and pa and iny brother Ike. Pa, 
he ’lowed he’d break up and go down and live with Uncle Ben, 
who’s got a little one-horse place on the river, forty-four mile 
below Orleans. Pa was pretty poor, and had some debts; so 
when he’d squared up there warn’t nothing left but sixteen 
dollars and our nigger, Jim. That wam’t enough to take ufl 





BUCK EXPLAINS. 


191 


fourteen hundred mUe, deck passage nor no other way. Well, 
when the river rose, pa had a streak of luck one day he 
ketched this piece of a raft; so we reckoned we’d go down to 
Orleans on it. Pa’s luck didn’t hold out; a steamboat run 
over the forrard corner of the raft, one night, and we all went 
overboard and dove under the wheel; Jim and me come up, all 
right, but pa was drunk, and Ike was only four years old, so 
they never come up no more. Well, for the next day or two 
we had considerable trouble, because people was always coming 
out in skiffs and trying to take Jim away from me, saying they 
believed he was a runaway nigger. We don’t run day-times 
no more, now; nights they don’t bother us.” 

The duke says— 

“ Leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the 
day-time if we want to. I’ll think the thing over—I’ll invent 
a plan that’ll fix it. We’ll let it alone for to-day, beca\ise of 
course we don’t want to go by that town yonder in daylight—it 
mightn’t be healthy.” 

Towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain: 
the heat lightning was squiiting around, low down in the sky, 
and the leaves was beginning to shiver—it was going to be pretty 
ugly, it was easy to see that. So the duke and the king went 
to overhauling our wigwam, to see what the beds was like. My 
bed was a straw tick—better than Jim’s, which was a com-shuck 
tick; there’s always cobs around about in a shuck tick, and they 
poke into you and hurt; and when you roll over, the dry 
shucks sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves; 
it makes such a rustling that you wake up. Well, the duke 
allowed he would take my bed; but the king allowed he 
wouldn’t. He says— 

“ I should a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested 
to you that a corh-shuck bed wam’t just fitten for me to sleep 
91). Yoxfr Gr^’U t^kp the shuck bed yourself,** 


I 



192 TUB AVVEXTUBBS OF UUCKLEBERTiY FINN. 


Jim and me was in a sweat again, fora minute, being afraid 
there was going to be some more trouble amongst them ; so we 
was pretty glad when the duke says— 

’Tis my fate to be always ground into the mire under the 
iron heel of oppression. Misfortune has broken my once haughty 
spirit; I yield, I submit; ’tis my fate. I am alone in the world 
—let me suffer ; I can bear it.” 

We got away as soon as it was good and dark. The king 
told us to stand well out towards the middle of the river, and 
not show a light till we got a long ways below the town. We 
come in sight of the little bunch of lights by-and-by—that was 
the town, you know—and slid by, about a half a mile out, all 
right. When we was three-quarters of a mile below, we hoisted 
up our signal lantern; and about ten o’clock it come on to rain 
and blow and thunder and lighten like everything; so the king 
told us to both stay on watch till the weather got better; then 
him and the duke crawled into the wigwam anrf turned in for 
the night. It was my watch below, till twelve, but I wouldn’t 
a turned in, anyway, if I’d had a bed ; because a body don’t see 
such a storm as that every day in the week, not by a long sight. 
My souls, how the wind did scream along ! And every second 
or two there’d come a glare that lit up the white-caps for half 
a mile around, and you’d see the islands looking dusty through 
the rain, and the trees thrashing around in the wind; then 
comes a k-wack! —bum! bum! bumble-umble-um-bum~bum- 
bura-bum—and the thunder would go rumbling and grumbling 
away, and quit—and then rvp comes another Bash and another 
sockdolager. The waves most washed me off the raft, some¬ 
times, but I hadn’t any clothes on, and didn’t mind. We 
didn’t have no trouble about snags; the lightning was glanng 
and flittering around so constant that we could see them plenty 
soon enough to throw her head this way or that and miss them. 

I had the middle watch, you know, but I was pretty sleepy 



LAYING OUT A CAMPAIGN. 


103 


by that time, so Jim he said he would stand the first half of it 
for me; be was always mighty good that way, Jim was. I 
crawled into the wigwam, but the king and the duke had their 


legs sprawled around so there warn’t no show for me; so I laid 
outside—I didn’t mind the rain, because it was warm, and the 
waves warn'L running so high, now. About two tliey come up 
again, though, and Jim was going to call me, but he changed 
his mind because he reckoned they warn’t high enough yet to 
do any harm; but he was mistaken about that, for pretty s(toD 
all of a sudden along comes a regular ripper, and washed me 
overboard. It most killed Jim a-laughing. He was the easiest 
•I'&gsr to laugh that ever was, anyway. 


I took the watch, and Jim he laid down and snored away ; 
and by-and-by the storm let up for good and all; and the first 
cabin-light that showed, I rousted him out and we slid the raft 
into hiding-quarters for the day. 

The king gat out an old ratty deck of cards, after breakfast, 
and him and the duke played seven-up a while, five cents a 
game. Then they got tired of it, and allowed they would “ l-iy 
out a campaign,” as they called it. The duke went down into 
his carpet-bag and fetched up a lot of little printed bills, and 
read them out loud. One bill said “The celebrated Dr. Armand 
de Montalban, of Paris,” would “lecture on the Science of 
hrenology ” at such and such a place, on the blank day of 
blank, at ten cents admission, and “furnish charts of character 

at twenty-five cents apiece.” The duke said that was In 

another bill he was the « world renowned Shaksperean tragedian, 
^ck the Younger, of Drury Lane, London.” In other bills 
i;u ^ ^ ° ® names and done other wonderful things, 

° ^ and gold with a “ divining rod,” “ dissipating 

mteh-speUs,-and so OD. By-and-by he sa/s- 

trod the 


0 



104 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ No,*' says the king, 

** You shall, then, before you’re three days older. Fallen 
Grandeur,” says the duke. “The first good town we come to, 
we’ll hire a hall and do the sword-fight in Kichard III. and the 
balcony scene in Itoineo and Juliet. How does that strike 
you?” 

“ I’m in, up to the hub, for anything that will pay, Bilge- 
water, but you see I don’t know nothing about play-acth*, 
hain’t ever seen much of 
have ’em at the palace. 

“Easy I ” 

“ All right. I’m jist a-freezn* for something fresh, anyway. 
Less commence, right away.” 

So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was, and who 
Juliet was, and said he was used to being Romeo, so thfe'klhg 

could be Juliet. 

“ But if Juliet’s such a young gal, duke, my peeled head 
and my white whiskers is goin’ to look oncommon odd on her, 

maybe.” ^ ^ 

“ No, don’t you worry—these country jakes won’t ever think 

of that.* Besides, you know, you’ll be in costume, and that 

makes all the difference in the world ; Juliet’s in a balcony, 

enjoying the moonlight before she goes to bed, and she’s got 

on her niglit-gown and her ruffled night-cap. Here are the 

costumes for the parts.” ^ ... -j 

He got out two or three curtain-calico suits, which he saw 

was meedyevil armour for Richard III. and t’other chap, and a 

long white cotton night-shirt and a ruffled night-cap to match. 

The king was satisfied ; so the duke got out his book and rea 

the parts over in the most splendid spread-eagle way, prancing 

around and acting at the same time, to show how it had got to 

be done ; then he give the book to the king and told him to get 

his part by heart. 


it. I was too small 
Do you reckon you can learn me ? 




you 


-I-W . 


WORKlNii THE CAMP-MEETING. 


196 



Tiiere was a little one-horse town about three mile down 
the bend, and after dinner the duke said he had ciphered out 
his idea about how to run in daylight williout it being danger- 
some for Jim; so he allowed he would go down to the town 
and fix that thiug. The king allowed he would go too, and see 


~r 


THE KINO AS JULIET. 


if he couldn’t strike something. We was out of coffee, so Jim 
said T better go along with them in the canoe and get some. 

lien we got there, there warn’t nobody stiiring ; streets 
empty, and perfectly dead and still, like Sunday. We found a 
sick Digger sunning himself in a back yard, and he said every* 

o % 


196 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

body that warn’t too young or too sick or too old was gone to 
camp-meeting, about two mile back in the woods. The king 
got the directions, and allowed he’d go and work that camp¬ 
meeting for all it was worth, and I might go, too. 

The duke said what he was after was a printing office. We 
found it; a little bit of a concern, up over a carpenter shop— 
carpenters and printers ah gone to the meeting, and no doors 
locked. It was a dirty, littered-up place, and had ink marks, 
and handbills with pictures of horses and runaway niggers on 
them, all over the walls. The duke shed his coat and said he 
was all right, now. So me and the king lit out for the camp- 

fneeting. 

We got there in about a half an hour, fairly drii)ping, for it 
was a most awful hot day. There was as much as a thousand 
people there, from twenty mile around. The woods was full of 
teams and wagons, hitched everywheres, feeding out of the 
wagon troughs and stomping to keep off the flies. There was 
sheds made out of poles and roofed over with branches, where 
they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell, and piles of water¬ 
melons and green corn and such-like truck. 

The preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds, 
only they was bigger and held crowds of people. The benches 
was made out of outside slabs of logs, with holes bored in thb 
round side to drive sticks into for legs. They didn’t iiave no 
backs. The preachers had high platforms to stand on, at one 
end of the sheds. The women had on sun-bonnets ; and some 
had linsey-woolsey frocks, some gingham ones, and a few of the 
youno- ones had on calico. Some of the young men was bare¬ 
footed, and some of the children didn’t have on any clothes but 
just a tow-linen shirt. Some of the old women was knitting, 
and some of the young folks was courting on the sly. ^ 

The first shed we come to, the preacher was lining out a 

hymn. He Uned out two lines, everybody sung it, and it was 



SLY COURTINO. 


l&? 

kind of grand to hear it, there was so many of them and they 
done it in such a rousing way; then he lined oat two more for 
them to sing—and so on. The people woke up more and more, 
and sung louder and louder ; and towards the end some begun 
to groan, and some begun to shout. Then the preacher begun 



••couaTiifo OM lilt, 60 *." 


to preach ; and begun in earnest, too; and went weaving 6 rst 
to one side of the platform and then the other, and then a lean¬ 
ing down over the front of it, with his arms and his body going 
all the time, and shouting Ttiis words out with all his might; 
and every now and then he would hold up his Bible and spread 


198 TUB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 


it open, and kind of pass it around this way and that, shouting, 
“ It’s the brazen serpent in the wilderness I Look upon it and 
live!” And people would shout out, “Glory!—A*a-me7i/” 
And so he went on, and the people groaning and crying and 
saying amen: 

“ (Jh, come to the mourners’ bench ! come, black with sin! 
{amen!) come, sick and sore! {amen!) come, lame and halt, 
and blind! {amen!) come, pore and needy, sunk in shame! 
{a-a~men !) come all that’s worn, and soiled, and suffering!— 
come with a broken spirit! come with a contrite heart! come 
in your rags and sin and dirt! the wat-ers that cleanse is free, 
the door of heaven stands open—oh, enter in and be at rest! ” 
(a-a-men. / gloryy glory hallelujah!) 

And so on. You couldn’t make out what the preacher said, 
any more, on account of the shouting and crying. Folks got 
up, everywheres in the crowd, and worked their way, just by 
main strength, to the mourners’ bench, with the tears running 
down their faces ; and when all the mourners had got up there 
to the front benches in a crowd, they sung, and shouted, 
and flung themselves down on the straw, just crazy and 
wild. 

Well, the first I knowed, the king got agoing; and you 
could hear him over everybody ; and next he went a-charging 
up on to the platform and the preacher he begged him to speak 
to the people, and he done it. He told them he wan a pirate- 
been a pirate for thirty years, out in the Indian Ocean, and his 
crew was thinned out considerable, last spring, in a fight, and 
he was home now, to take out some fresh men, and thanks to 
goodness he’d been robbed last night, and put ashore off of a 
steamboat without a cent, and he was glad of it, it was the 
blessedest thing that ever happened to him, because he was a 
changed man now, and happy for the first time in his life; and 
poor as he was, he was going to start right off and work his way 



A PIRATE AT TEE CAMP-MEETINQ. 169 

back to the Indian Ocean and put in the rest of his life trying 
to turn the pirates into the true path : for he could do it better 
than anybody else, being acquainted with all the pirate crews 
in that ocean; and though it would take hin^ a long time to 
get there without money, he would get there anyway, and every 
time he convinced a pirate he would say to him, “ Don't you 



thank me, don’t you give me no credit, it all belongs to them 
dear people in Pokeville camp-meeting, natural brothers and 
benefactors of the race—and that dear preacher there, the truest 
frieud a pirate ever had I ” 

And then he busted into tears, and so did everybody. Then 
somebody singB out, “ Take up a collection for him, take up a 



200 THE ABTENTXJRES OF HUCSLEBEMRY FIFE. 

collection!” Well, a half a dozen made a jump to do it, but 
somebody sings out, « Let him pass the hat around ! ” Then 
everybody said it, the preacher too. 

So the king went all through the crowd with his hat, swab¬ 
bing his eyes, and blessing the people and praising them and 
thanking them for being so good to the poor pirates away off 
there; and every little while the prettiest kind of girls, with 
the tears running down their cheeks, would up and ask him 
would he let them kiss him, for to remember him by j and he 
always done it; and some of them he hugged and kissed as 
many as five or six times—and he was invited to stay a week ; 
and everybody wanted him to live in their houses, and said 
they d think it was an honour; but he said as this was the last 
day of the camp-meeting he couldn’t do no good, and besides 
he was in a sweat to get to the Indian Ocean right off and go 
to work on the pirates 

When we got back to the raft and he come to count up, he 
found he had collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five 
cents. And then he had fetched away a three-gallon jug of 
whisky, too, that he found under a wagon when we was starting 
home through the woods. The king said, take it all around, it 
laid over any day he’d ever put in in the missionarying line. 
He said it wam’t no use talking, heathens don’t amount 
to shucks, alongside of pirates, to work a camp-meeting 
with. 

The duke was thinking he*d been doing pretty well, till 
the king come to show up, but after that he didn’t think so so 
much. He had set up and printed off two little jobs for farmers, 
in that printing office—horse bills—and took the money, four 
dollars. And he had got in ten dollars’ worth of advertisements 
for the paper, which he said he would put in for four dollars if 
they would pay in advance—so they done it. The price of 
the paper was two dollars a year, but he took in three subscrip' 



THE DUKE AS A PRINTER. 


901 


tions for half a dollar apiece on condition of them paying him 
in advance; they were goingtopayin cord-wood and onions, 
as usual, but he said he had just bought the concern and 
knocked down the price as low as he could afford it, and was 
going to run it for cash. He set up a little piece of poetry^ 



ANOTHER LITTLE JOB. 


which he made, himself, out of his own head—three verses— 
kind of sweet and saddish—the name of it was, ** Yes, crush, 
cold world, this breaking heart”—and he left that all set up 
and ready to print in the paper and didn’t charge nothing for 
it. Well, he took in nine dollars and a balf^ and said he’d done 
a pretty square day’s work for it. 


202 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


Then he showed us another little job he’d printed and 
hadn’t charged for, because it was for us. It had a picture of 
a runaway nigger, with a bundle on a stick, over his shoulder, 
and “ ^200 reward ” under it. The reading was all about Jim, 
and just described him to a dot. It said he run away from St, 
Jacques’ plantation, forty mile below New Orleans, last winter, 
and likely went north, and whoever would catch him and send 
him back, he could have the reward and expenses. 

“ Now,” says the duke, “ after to-night we can run in the 
daytime if we want to. \Mienever we see anybody coming, we 
can tie Jim hand and foot with a rope, and lay him in the wig¬ 
wam and show this handbill and say we captured him up the 
river, and were too poor to travel on a steamboat, so we got this 
little raft on credit from our friends and are going down to get 
the reward. Handcuffs and chains would look still better on 
Jim, but it wouldn’t go well with the story of us being so poor. 
Too much like jewellery. Ropes are the correct thing—vre 
must preserve the unities, as we say on the boards.” 

We all said the duke was pretty smart, and there couldnt 
be no trouble about running daytimes. We judged we could 
make miles enough that night to get out of the reach of the 
pow-wow we reckoned the duke’s work in the printing office was 
going to make in that little town—then we could boom right 
along, if we wanted to. 

We laid low and kept still, and never shoved out till nearly 
ten o’clock; then we slid by, pretty wide away from the town, 
and didn’t hoist our lantern till we was clear out of sight 

of it. 

When Jim called me to take the watch at four in the morn¬ 
ing, he says— 

“ Huck, does you reck’n we gwyne to run across any mo 

kings on dis trip?” 

“ No,” I says, “ I reckon not.” 



JIM WANTED. 


20S 


“Well,” says he, “dat’s all right, den. I doan’ mine one er 
two kings, but dat’s enough. Dis one’s powerful drunk, en de 
duke ain’ much better.” 

I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French, so 
he could hear what it was like; but he said he had been in this 
country so long, and had so much trouble, he’d forgot it. 



CHAPTER XXI.

was after sun-up, 
now, but we went 
riglit on, and didn’t 
tie up. The king 
and the duke turned 
out, by-and-by, look- 
ingpretty rusty; but 
after they’d jumped 
overboard and took a 
swim, it chippered 
them up a good deal. 
After breakfast the 
king he took a seat 
on a corner of the 
raft, and pulled off 
his boots and rolled 
up his britches, and 
let his legs dangle in the water, so as to be comfortable, and 
lit his pipe, and went to getting his Romeo and Juliet by 
heart. When he had got it pretty good, him and the duke 
begun to practise it together. The duke had to learn him over 
and over again, how to say every speech; and he made him 
sigh, and put his hand on his heart, and after while he said he 
lone it pretty well; “only,” he says, “you musn't bellow out 




PRACTISING. 



SWOnD EXERCISK. 


20lt 

Romeo! that way, like a bull—-you must say it soft, and sick, 
and languishy, so—R-o-o-meo ! that is the idea; for Juliet’s a 
dear sweet mere child of a girl, you know, and she don’t bray 
like a jackass.” 

Well, next they got out a couple of long swords that the 
duke made out of oak laths, and begun to practise the sword- 
fight—the duke called himself Richard III.; and the way they 
laid on, and pranced around the raft was grand to see. But 
hy-and-by the king tripped and fell overboard, and after that 
they took a rest, and had a talk about all kinds of adventures 
they’d had in other times along the river. 

After dinner, the duke says: 

“ Well, Capet, we’ll want to make this a first-class show, you 
know, so I guess we’ll add a little more to it. We want a little 
something to answer encores with, anyway.” 

“ What’s onkores, Bilgewater? ” 

The duke told him, and then says: 

“ rU answer by doing the Highland fling or the sailor’s 
hornpipe; and you—well, let me see—oh, I’ve got it—you can 
do Hamlet’s soliloquy.” 

“ Hamlet’s which ? ” 

“ Hamlet’s soliloquy, you know ; the most celebrated thing 
in Shakespeare. Ah, it’s sublime, sublime! Always fetches 
the house. I haven’t got it in the book—I’ve only got one 
volume—but I reckon I can piece it out from memory. I’ll 
just walk up and do\vn a minute, and see if I can call it back 
from recollection’s vaults.” 

So he went to marching up and down, thinking, and frown¬ 
ing horrible every now and then; then he would hoist up his 
eyebrows; next he would squeeze his hand on his forehead and 
back and kind of moan; next he would sigh, and next 
he d let on to drop a tear. It was beautiful to see him. By- 
and-by he got I'fc, Jfe told us to give attention. Then he 



806 TBS ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

strikes a most noble attitude, with one leg shoved forwards, and 
his arms stretched away up, and his head tilted back, looking 
up at the sky ; and then he begins to rip and rave and grit his 
teeth; and after that, all through his speech he howled, and 
spread around, and swelled up his chest, and just knocked the 


HAMLliT'S SOLILOQUY. 

spots out of any acting ever 1 see before. This is the speech— 
I learned it, easy enough, while he was learning it to the king: 

To be. or not to be; that ia the bare bodkin 
That makeet cilamity of eo long life; 

For who would fardcU bear. tiU Bimam Wood do come to Dun»inare, 



HAMLETS SOLILOQUY. 


207 


But that the fear of Bomething after death 
Murders the innocent sleep, 

Great nature's second course, 

And makes us rather sling the arrows of outrageous fortune 
Than fiy to others that we know not ol 
There's the respect must give us pause; 

Wake Duncan with thy knocking t I would thou couldst; 

For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, 

The oppressor's wrong, the proud man’s contumely, 

The law's delay, and the quietus which his pangs might take, 

In the dead waste and middle of the night, when churchyards yawn 
Id customary suits of solcoin black, 

But that the undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveller returns. 
Breathes forth contagion on the world, 

And thus the native hue of resolution, like the poor cat i* the aduge. 

Is sicklied o'er with care, 

And all the clouds that lowered o’er our housetops, 

With this regard their currents turn awry, 

And lose the name of action. 

Tis a consummation devoutly to be wished. But soft you, the fair Ophelia; 
Ope not thy {>onderous and marble jaws. 

But get tbee to a nunnery—go I 

Well, the old miiQ he liked that speech, and he mighty soon 
got it so he could do it first rate. It seemed like he was just 
bom for it; and when he had his hand in and was excited, it 
was perfectly lovely the way he would rip and tear and rair up 
behind when he was getting it off. 

The first chance we got, the duke he had some show bills 
printed; and after that, for two or three days as we floated 
along, the raft was a most uncommon lively place, for there wam’t 
nothing but sword-fighting and rehearsing—as the duke called it 
—going on all the time. One morning, when we was pretty well 
down the State of Arkansaw, we come in sight of a little one- 
horse town in a big bend; so we tied up about three-quarters 
of a mile above it, in the mouth of a crick which was shut in 
like a tunnel by the cypress trees, and all of us but Jim took 
the canoe and went down there to see if there was any chance 
in that place for our show. 



208 THE ADVEETURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINE, 


We struck it mighty lucky; there was going to be a circus 
there that afternoon, and the coxmtry people was already begin¬ 
ning to come in, in all kinds of old shackly wagons, and on 
horses. The circus would leave before night, so our show would 
have a pretty good chance. The duke he hired the court house, 
and we went around and stuck up our bills. They read like 
this: 

4 

ShakspereaD Revival 1 I ) 

Wonderful Attraction I 
For One Night Only 1 

The world renowned tiagcdians, 

David Garrick the younger, of Drury Lane Theatre. I>ondoa, 

and ^ 

Kdmund Kean tlie elder, of the Royal Baymarkct Theatre, Whito- 
chniicl, Pudding Lane, Piccadilly. London, and the 
Royal Continental Theatres, in their sublime 
Shuksperean Spectacle entitled 

The Balcony Scene 
in 

Romeo and Juliet I I t 


Romeo... Mr. Garrick 

Juliet.:. Mr. Kean 


Assisted by the whole strength of the company I 
New costumes, new scenery, new appointments I 

Also: 

The thrilling, masterly, and blood-curdling 
Bruad-sword conilict 
In Riclianl III. 1 I I 

Kichaixi III. Mr. Garrick. 

Richmond. Mr. Kean. 

also; 

(by special request,) 

Hamlet's Immortal Soliloquy I I 

By the Dlustrious Kean I 
Done by him 300 consecutive nights in Paris I 

Fcr One Night Only, 

On account of imperative European engagementji i 
Admission 26 cents; children and servants, 10 cents. 







rnEV LOAFET) Aiiovsn roir.v. 


2(‘H 

Then we went loafing around the town. The stores and 
houses was most all old sbackly dried-up frame concerns that 
hadn’t ever been painted; they was set up three or four foot 
above ground on stilts, so as to be out of reach of the water 
when the river was overflowed. The houses bad little gardens 
around them, but they didn’t seem to raise hardly anything in 
them but jimpson weeds, and sunflowers, and ash-piles, and 
old curled-up boots and shoes, and pieces of bottles, and rags, 
and played-out tin-ware. The fences was made of ditfeient 
kinds of boards, nailed on at different times ; and they leaned 
every whieh-way, and had gate& that didn’t generly have but 
one hinge—a leather one. Some of the fences had been white¬ 
washed, some time or another, but the duke said it was in 
C’lumbus’s time, like enough. There was generly hogs in the 
garden, and people driving them out. 

All the stores was along one street. They had white- 
domestic awnings in front, and the country people hitched their 
horses to the awning-posts. There was ecipty dry-goods boxes 
under the a;vnings, and loafers roosting on them all day long, 
whittling them with their Barlow knives ; and chawing tobacco, 
and gaping and yawning and stretching—a mighty ornery lot. 
They generly had on yellow straw hats most as wide as an 
umbrella, but didn’t wear no coats nor waistcoats; they called 
one another Bill, and Buck, and Hank, and Joe, and Andy, and 
talked lazy and drawly, and used considerable many cuss- 
words. There was as many as one loafer leaning up against 
every awning-post, and he most always had his hands in his 
britches pockets, except when he fetched them out to lend a ■ 
chaw of tobacco or scratch. What a body was hearing amongst 
them, all the time was_ 

“ Gimme a chaw V tobacker, Hank.” 

« Cain’t—I hain’t got but one chaw left. Ask Bill.” 

itaybe Bill he gives him a chaw ; maybe he lies and says 



210 THE ADVr.yTUREiS OF HUCKLEBERRY FISH. 


he ain’t got none. Some of them kinds of loafers never has a 
cent in the world, nor a chaw of tobacco of their own. They 
get all their chawing by borrowing—they say to a fellow, “ I 
wisht youM len’ me a chaw, Jack, I jist this minute give Ben 



“OIMME A CHAW." 


Thompson the last chaw I had ”—which is a lie, pretty much 
every time; it don’t fool nobody but a stranger; but Jack ain t 
DO stranger, so he says— 

F<w give him a chaw, did you? so did your sister’s cats 
grandmother. You pay me back the chaws you’ve awready 























A LAZY TOWN. 


ail 


borry’d off’n me, Lafe Buckner, then V\\ loan you one or two 
ton of it, and won’t charge you no back intrust nuther.” 

“ Well, I did pay you back some of it wunst.” 

« Yes, you did—’bout six chaws. You borry’d store tobacker 

aud paid back nigger-head.” 

Store tobacco is flat black plug, but these fellows mostly 
chaws the natural leaf twisted. When they borrow a chaw, 
they don’t generly cut it off with a knife, but they set the 
plug in between their teeth, and gnaw with their teeth and 
tug at the plug with their hands till they get it in two—then 
sometimes the one that owns the tobacco looks mournful at it 
when it’s handed back, and says, sarcastic— 

“ Here, gimme the chaWy and you take the plug.** 

All the streets and lanes was just mud, they warn’t nothing 
else but mud—mud as black as tar, and nigh about a foot deep 
in some places; and two or three inches deep in all the places. 
The hogs loafed and grunted around, everywheres. You’d see 
a muddy sow and a litter of pigs come lazying along the street 
and wbollop herself riglit down in the way, where folks had to 
walk around her, and she’d stretch out, and shut her eyes, and 
wave her ears, whilst the pigs was milking her, and look as 
happy as if she was on salary. And pretty soon you’d hear a 
loafer sing out, “ Hi! 80 boy! sick him, Tige! ” and away the 
sow would go, squealing most horrible, with a dog or two 
swinging to each ear, and three or four dozen more a-coming; 
and then you would see all the loafers get up and watch the 
thing out of sight, and laugh at the fun and look grateful for the 
noise. Then they’d settle back again till there was a dog-fight. 
There couldn’t anything wake them up all over, and make them 
happy all over, like a dog-fight—unless it. might be putting 
turpentine on a stray dog and setting fire to him, or tying a 
tin pan to his tail and see him run himself to death. 

On the river front some of the houses was sticking out over 



•m THE AJ)r?JXTUEES OF IirCKLEBERRY FINN. 


the bank, and they was bowed and bent, and about ready to 
tumble in. The people had moved out of them. The bank 
was caved away under one comer of some others, and that 
comer was hanging over. People lived in them yet, but it was 
dangersome, because sometimes a strip of land as wide as a 
house cav'es in at a time. Sometimes a belt of land a quarter 
of a mile deep will start in and cave along and cave along till 
it all caves into the river in one summer. Such a town as that 
has to be always moving back, and back, and back, because the 
river’s always gnawing at it. 

'I’he nearer it got to noon that day, the thicker and thicker 
was the wagons and horses in the streets, and more coming all 
the time. Families fetched their dinners with them, from the 
country, and eat them in the wagons. There was considerable 
whisky drinking going on, and I seen three fights. By-and-by 
somebody sings out— 

“ Here comes old Boggs! —in from the country for his little 
old monthly drunk —here he comes, boys!” 

All the loafers looked glad—I reckoned they was used to 
having fun out of Boggs. One of them says— 

« Wonder who he’s a gwyne to chaw up this time. If he’d 
a chawed up all the men he’s ben a gwyne to chaw up in the 
last twenty year, he’d have considerble ruputation, now.” 

Another one says, “ I wisht old Boggs ’d threaten me, ’cnz 
then I’d know I wam’t gwyne to die for a thousan’ year.” 

Boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse, whooping and yel¬ 
ling like an Injun, and singing out— 

“ Cler the track, thar. I’m on the waw-path, and the price 

uv coffins is a gwyne to raise.” 

He was drunk, and weaving about in his saddle; he wae 
over fifty year old, and had a very red face. Everybody yelled 
at him, and laughed at hin:, and sassed him, and he sassed 
back, and said he’d attend to them and lay them out in their 



OLD BOQQS. 


218 


regular turns, but he couldn’t wait now, because he’d come to 
town to kill old Colonel Sherburn, and bis motto was, ‘ xMeat 
6 rst, and spoon vittles to top off on. 

He see me, and rode up and says ^ 

“mar’d you come f’m, boy? You prepared to die? 

Then be rode on. I was scared ; but a man says—- 
“ He don’t mean nothing; he’s always a carryin’ on like 
that, when he’s drunk. He’s the best-naturedcst old fool in 
Arkansaw—never hurt nobody, drunk nor sober. 



A LlllUbi .tfUMTULV UUUMi.. 


Boggs rode up before the biggest store in town and bent bis 
head down so he could see under the curtain of the awning, and 
yells— 

“ Come out here, Sherbum! Come out and meet the man 
you’ve swindled. You’re the houn* I’m after, and I’m a gwyne 
to have you, too! ” 

And 80 he went on, calling Sherbum everything he could 



214 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


lay his tongue to, and the whole street packed with people 
listening and laughing and going on. By-and-by a proud- 
looking man about fifty-five—and he was a heap the best-dressed 
man in that town, too—steps out of the store, and the crowd 
drops back on each side to let him come. He says to Boggs, 
mighty calm and slow—he says : 

“ I’m tired of this ; but I’ll endure it till one o’clock. Till 
one o’clock, mind—no longer. If you open your mouth against 
me only once, after that time, you can’t travel so far but I will 
find you.” 

Then he turns and goes in. The crow<i looked miglity sober; 
nobody stirred, and there warn't no more laughing. Boggs 
rode off blackguarding Sherbum as loud as he could yell, all 
down the street; and pretty soon back he comes and stops 
before the store, still keeping it up. Some men crowded 
around him and tried to get him to shut up, but he wouldn’t; 
they told him it would be one o’clock in about fifteen minutes, 
and so he must go home—he must go right away. Hut it 
didn’t do no good. He cus«ed away, with all his might, and 
throwed his hat down in the mud and rode over it, and pretty 
Boon away he went a-raging down the street again, with his 
gray hair a-flying. Everybody that could get a chance at him 
tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they could lock 
him up and get him sober; but it warn't no use—up the street 
he would tear again, and give Sherburn another cussing. By- 
and-by somebody says: 

“ Go for his daughter !—quick, go for his daughter ; some¬ 
times he’ll listen to her. If anybody can persuade him, she 
can.” 

So somebody started on a run. I walked dcwn street a 
ways, and stopped. In about five or ten minutes, here comes 
Boggs again—but not on his horse. He was a-reeling across 
the street towards me, bareheaded, with a friend on both sides 



DEATH OF B0GQ8. 


S16 


of Mm aholfc of his arms and hurrying him along. He was 
quiet, and looked uneasy; and he warn’t hanging back any, but 
was doing some of the hurrying himself. Somebody sings out— 
“ Boggs! ” 

I looked over there to see who said it, and it was that 



TnS DEATH OP B0008. 


Colonel bherbum. He was standing perfectly still in the street, 
and had a pistol raised in his right hand—not aiming it, but 
bolding it ont with the barrel tilted up towards the sky. The 
same second I see a young girl coming on the run, and two men 



216 THE AHVBNTUKBS OF HUCKLEBERUT FINE. 


with her. Boggs and the men turned round, to see who called 
him» and when they see the pistol the men jumped to one side, 
and the pistol barrel come down slow and steady to a level— 
both barrels cocked. Boggs throws up both of his hands, and 
says. “ 0 Lord, don’t shoot! ” Bang! goes the first shot, and 
he staggers back clawing at the air—bang! goes the second 
one, and he tumbles backwards on to the ground, heavy and 
solid, with his arms spread out. That young girl screamed out, 
and comes rushing, and down she throws herself on her father, 
crying, and Saying, “ Oh, he’s killed him, he’s killed him! ” 
The crowd closed up around them, and shouldered and jammed 
one another, with their necks stretched, trying to see, and people 
on the inside trying to shove them back, and shouting, Back, 
back ! give him air, give him air! ” 

Colonel Sherbum he tossed his pistol onto the ground, and 
turned around on his heels and walked ofif. 

They took Boggs to a little drug store, the crowd pressing 
around, just the same, and the whole town following, and J 
rushed and got a good place at the window, where I was close 
to him and could see in. They laid him on the floor, and put 
one large Bible under his head, and opened another one and 
spread it on his breast—but they tore open his shirt first, and I 
seen where one of the bullets went in. He made about a dozen 
long gasps, his breast lifting the Bible up when he drawed in 
his breath, and letting it down again when he breathed it out 
—and after that he laid still; he was dead. Then they pulled 
his daughter away from him, screaming and crying, and took 
her off. She was about sixteen, and very sweet and gentle- 
looking, but awful pale and scared. 

Well, pretty soon the whole town was there, squirming and 
scrouging and pushing and shoving to get at the window and 
have a look, but people that had the places wouldn’t give them 
up, and folks behind them was saying all the time, “ Say, now, 


DEATH OF BOOOS. 


117 


you've looked enough, you fellows; ’taint right and 'taint fair, 
for you to stay thar all the time, and never give nobi dy a 
chance; other folks has their rights as well as you.” 

There was considerable jawing back, so I slid out, thinking 
maybe there was going to be trouble. The streets was full, 
and everybody was excited. Everybody that seen tlie sliooting 
was telling how it happened, and there was a big crowd packed 
around each one of these fellows, stretching their necks and 
listening. One long lanky mao, wdth long hair and a big white 
fur stove-pipe hat on the back of bis head, and a crooked- 
handled cane,marked out the places on thegi'ound where 
stood, and where Sherburn stood, and the i)eople following him 
around from one place to t’other and watching everything he 
done, and bobbing their heads to show they understood, and 
stooping a little, and resting their hands on their thighs to watch 
him mark the places on the ground with his cane ; and then he 
stood up straiglit and stiff where Sherburn had .stood, frowning 
and having his hat-brim down over his eyes, and sung out, 
“ ^oggs! ” and then fetched his cane down slow to a deatl level, 
and says “Bang! ” staggered backwards, says “ Bang ! ” again, 
and fell down flat on his back. The people that had seen the 
thing said he done it perfect; said it was just exactly the way 
it all happened. Then as much as a dozen people got out their 
bottles and treated him. 

^ ell, by-and-by somebody said Sherburn ought to be 
lynched. In about a minute everybody was saying it; so 
away they went, mad and yelling, and snatching down every 
clothes-Une they come to, to do the hanging with. 







'^v>V.iK —'-I 

0 - 

> //. . ' /a^ 


aDieri 




'*< •V'.l 

■'••\ n* 


r Xs'r - 

f-t#’ ~~ — 

•’^m:r =r-- 

-- - 

f- '•'■'A' ^ - 


Tt 


'V '-4^ 


V. V ■ ■ 












iiUi'i'mi;-; 

^»». —«»ti >■ I 


t!« 


i 5- 






PHFllBURN STEPS OUT. 


CHAPTER XXII.

swnrnipd np the stree' 
f'J~'.-^~^Zl. tovrairls Sherburu's house, 

—- - - .. a-wlioopin^ and yelling 

hke Injuns, 

r- :^-'r r~-T~ everything had to 

S cl»'ar the way or get run 

over and trom)>erl to 
Pj'|||| l^^- nmsli, and it was awful 

(!| |Tir—Children was 
’ heeling it ahead^of the 
mob, screaming and try- 
ing to get out of the 
liTfrii'jlJ\l way: and every window 

along the roa/was full 
of women’s heads, and 
^ there was nigger boys in 

/ ’'^ ]J every tree, and bucks and 

^ wenches looking over 

UT. every fence; and as soon 


as the mob would get 
nearly to them they would break and skaddle back out of reach, 
lyots of the women and girls was crying and taking on, scared 
most to death. 

They swarmed up in front of Sherbum’s palings as thick as 


■ 



SHBRBUnN. 


219 


they could jam together, and you couldn’t hear yourself think 
for the noise. It was a little twenty-foot yard. Some sung 
out, “ Tear down the fence 1 tear down the fence! ’ Then there 
was a racket of ripping and tearingand smashing, and ilown she 
goes, and the front wall of the crowd begins to roll in like a wave. 

Just then Sherbum steps out on to the roof of his little 
front porch, with a double-barrel gun in his hand, and takes 
his stand perfectly calm and deliberate, not- saying a word. 
The racket stopped, and the wave sucked hark. 

Sherbum never said a word—^jiist stood ihere, looking down. 
The stillness was awful creepy and uncomfortable. Slierbnm 
mn his eye slow along the crowd; and wherever it struck, the 
people tried a little to outgaze him, but they couldn't; they 
dropped their eyes and looked sneaky. Then pretty soon Sher- 
burn sort of laughed ;-not the pleasant kind, but the kind that 
makes you feel like when you are eating bread.that's got sand 
in it. 


Then he says, slow and scornful; 

“The idea of you lynching anybody ! It’s amusing. The 
idea of you thinking you bad pluck enough to lynch ^'mant 
Because you re brave enough to tar and feather poor friendless 


cast.-out women that come along here, did that make you think 
you had grit enough to lay your hands on a man f Why, a 
mans safe in the hands of ten thousand of your kind—as long 
as it’s daytime and you’re not behind him. 

“ Do I know you ? I know you clear through. I was born 
and raised in the South, and I’ve lived in the North; so I 
know the average ail around. The average man’s a coward. In 
the North he lets anybody walk over him that wants to, and 
goes home and prays for a humble spirit to bear it. In the 
South one man, all by himself, has stopped a stage full of men, 
in the daytime, and robbed the lot. Your newspapers call you 
a brave people so much that you think you are braver than any 


230 TRE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

other people—whereas you’re just as brave, and no braver. 
Why don’t your juries hang murderers ? Because they’re afraid 
the man’s friends will shoot them in the back, in the dark— 
and it’s just what they would do. 

“ So they always acquit; and then a man goes in the night, 
with a hundred masked cowards at his back, and lynches the 
ra-scal. Your mistake is, that you didn’t bring a man with 
you ; that’s one mistake, and the olher is that you didn’t come 
in the dark, and fetch your masks. You brought pari of a 

—Buck Harkness, there—and if you hadn’t had him to 
start you, you’d a taken it out in blowing. 

“ You didn’t want to come. The average man don’t like 
trouble and danger. don’t like trouble and danger. But 

if only half a man—like Buck Harkness, there—shouts ‘ Lynch 
him, lynch him! * you’^ afraid to hack^jbown—afrai'’ vou’ll be 
found out to r*" what you are— cowards —and so you raise a 
yell, and hang yourselves on to that half-a-man’s coat tail, and 
come raging up here, swearing what big things you’re going to 
do. The pitifullest thing out is a mob; that’s what an army is 
—a mob; they don’t fight with courage that’s born in them, 
but with courage that’s borrowed from their mass, and from 
their officers. But a mob without any man at the head of it, 
is beneath pitifulness. Now the thing for you to do, is to 
droop your tails and go home and crawl in a hole. If any real 
lynching’s going to be done, it will be done in the dark, 
Southern fashion; and when they come they’ll bring their 
masks, and fetch a man along. Now leave —and take your 
half-a-man with you ”—tossing his gun up across his left arm 
and cocking it, when he says this. 

The crowd washed back sudden, and then broke all apart 
and went tearing off every which way, and Buck Harkness he 
heeled it after them, looking tolerable cheap. 1 could a staid, 
if I’d a wanted to, but I didn’t want to. 



ATTFynixo run cikcjts. 


22\ 


I went to the circus, and loafed around the bac;k side till 
. the watchman went by, and then dived in under itie tent. I 
had my twenty-dollar gold piece and some other money, but I 
reckoned I better save it, because there ain't no ttdling how 
soon you are going to need it, away from home and amongst 
strangers, that way. You can’t be too careful. I ain’t opposed 
to spending money on circuses, when there ain’t no other way, 
but there ain't no use in wasting it on them. 

It was a real bully circus. It was the splendidest sight 



A DEAD HEAD 

that ever was, when they all come riding in, two and two, a 
gentleman and lady, side by side, the men just in their 
drawers and under-shirts, and no shoes nor stirrups, and resting 
^ their hands on their thighs, easy and comfortable—there must 
a been twenty of them—and every lady with a lovely com¬ 
plexion, and perfectly beautiful, and looking just like a gang of 
real sure-enough queens, and dressed in clothes that cost 
mi 'ans of dollars, and just Uttered with diamonds. It was a 
powerful fine sight; I never see anything so lovely. And tlien 


222 THE AI) TEXTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINX. 


one by one they g^ot up and stood, and went a-weaving around 
the ring so gentle and wavy and graceful, the men looking ever 
80 tall and airy and straight, with their heads bobbing and 
skimming along, away up there under the tent-roof, and every 
lady’s rose-leafy dress flapping soft and silky around her hips, 
and she looking like the most loveliest parasol. 

And then faster and faster they went, all of them dancing, 
first one foot stuck out in the air and then the other, the 
horses leaning more and more, and the ring-master going round 
and round the centre-pole, cracking his whip and shouting 
“hi!—hi!” and the clown cracking jokes behind him; and 
by-and-by all hands dropped the reins, and every lady put her 
knuckles on her hips and every gentleman folded his arms, 
and then how the horses did lean over and hump themselves! 
And so, one after the other they all skipped oflf into the ring, 
and made thft sweetest bow I ever see, and then scampered 
out, and everybody clapped their hands and went just about 
wild. 

Well, all through the circus they done the most astonishing 
things ; and all the time that clown carried on so it most killed 
the people. The ring-master couldn’t ever say a word to him 
but he was back at him quick as a wink with the funniest 
things a body ever said; and how he ever could think of so 
many of them, and so sudden and so pat, was what I couldn’t 
noway understand, ^^^y, I couldn’t a thought of them in a 
year. And by-and-by a drunk man tried to get into the ring 
—said he wanted to ride; said he could ride as well as any¬ 
body that ever was. They argued and tried to keep him out, 
but he wouldn’t listen, and the whole show come to a stand¬ 
still. Then the people begun to holler at him and make fun 
of him, and that made him mad, and he begun to rip and tear; 
BO that stirred up the people, and a lot of men begun to pile 
down off of the benches and swarm towards the ring, saying, 



lNTOXlCATIO?i IN THE ni.XG. 


225 


‘‘Knock hitn down! throw him out!” and one or two women 
begun to scream. So, then, the ring-master he made a little 
speech, and said he hoped there wouldn’t be no disturbance, 
and if the man would promise he wouldn’t make no more 
trouble, he would let him ride, if he thought he could sta)’ on 



HE SHED SEVENTEEN SyiTi 


the horse. So everybody laughed and said all right, and the 
man got on The minute he was on, the horse begun to rip 

hanJT" around, with two circus men 

K^gtng on to hrs bridle trying to bold hint, and the dmolr 

man hanging on to his neck, and his heels dying in the ait 



224 THE ADVENTUIiES OF HUrKLEBEERY FINN. 


every jump, and the whole crowd of people standing up shout¬ 
ing and laughing till the tears rolled down. And at last, sure 
enough, all the circus men could do, the horse broke loose, and 
away he went like the very nation, round and round the ring, 
with that sot laying down on him and hanging to his neck, 
with first one leg hanging most to the ground on one side, and 
then t’other one on t’other side, and the people just crazy. It 
warn’t funny to me, though; I was all of a tremble to see his 
danger. But pretty soon he struggled up astraddle and grabbed 
the bridle, a-reeling this way and that; and the next minute 
he sprung up and dropped the bridle and stood ! and the horse 
agoing like a house afire too. He just stood up there, a-sailing 
around as easy and comfortable a.s if he wam’t ever drunk in 
his life—and then he begun to pull oCF his clothes and sling 
them. He shed them so thick they kind of clogged up the 
air, and altogether he shed seventeen suits. And then, there 
he was, slim and handsome, and dressed the gaudiest and 
prettiest you ever saw, and he lit into that horse with his whip 
and made him fairly hum—-and finally skipped off, and made 
his bow and danced off to the dressing-room, and everybody 


just a-howling with pleasure and astonishment. 

I’hen the ring-master he see how he had been fooled, and 
he was the sickest ring-master you ever see, I reckon. Why, 
it was one of his own men ! He had got up that joke all out 
of his own head, and never let on to nobody. Well, 1 feh 
sheepish enough, to be took in so, but I wouldn’t a been-in 
that ring-master’s place, not for a thousand dollars. I don t 
know; there may be bullier circuses than what that one was, 
but I never struck them yet. Anyways it was plenty good 
enough for me; and wherever I run across it, it can have all of 


custom, every time. 

Well, that night we had our show; but there wam’t only 
about twelve people there ; just enough to pay expenses And 



THE THRILLINO TRAGEDY. 


226 


they laughed all the time, and that made the duke mad j and 
everybody left, anyway, before the show was over, but one boy 
which was asleep. So the duke said these Arkansaw lunkheads 
couldn’t come up to Shakspeare; what they wanted was low 
comedy—and maybe something ruther worse than low comedy, 
he reckoned. He said he could size their style. So next morn¬ 
ing he got some big sheets of wrapping-paper and some black 
paint, and drawed off some handbills and stuck them up all 
over the village. The bills said: 

AT THE COURT HOUSE I 
FOB 3 MIGHTS ONLY I 
The World'Rennttned Tragediant 

DAVID GARRICK THE YOUNGER I 

AND 

EDMUND KEAN THE ELDER 1 

Of the Lttndon and Continental 
Theutrce, 

In their Thrilling Tragedy of 
THE KING'S CAMELOPARD 

OR 

THE ROYAL NONESUCH I t t 
Admittion 60 cent$. 

l^en at the bottom was the biggest line of all—which 
said: 

LADIES AND CHILDREN NOT ADMITTED 

“if that line don’t fetch them, I don’t 
know Ai-kansaw 1 ” » . * 





m 


K 












r 


' 7 ^ 







TBAGEDY. 

CHAPTER XXIII.

VVbll, all day him and the 
king was hard at it, 
rigging up a stage, and 
a curtain, and a row of 
/ candles for foot-lights ; 

and that night the house 
was jam full of men in 
no time. When the 
f place couldn’t hold no 

. more, the duke he quit 

tending door and went 
^ around the back way 

and come on to the 
stage and stood up he- 
^ fore the curtain, and 

made a little speech, 
and praised up this 
tragedy, and said it was 
♦ hp mnat thiillingest 




one that ever was; and so he went on a-bragging about the 
tragedy, and about Edmund Kean the Elder, which was to 
play the main principal p;irt in it; and at last when bed got 
everybody’s expectations up high enough, he rolled up the 
curtain, and the next minute the king come a-prancing out ob 



« SOLD.” 


227 


all foxirs, naked; and he was painted all over, ring-streaked-and- 
striped, all sorts of colours, as splendid £is a rainbow. And— 
but never mind the rest of his outfit, it was just wild, but it 
was awful funny. The people most killed themselves laughing; 
and when the king got done capering, and capered off behind 
the scenes, they roared and clapped and stormed and haw-hawed 
till he come back'and done it over again; and after that, they 
made him do it another time. Well, it would a made a cow 
laugh to see the shines that old idiot cut. 

Then the duke he lets the curtain down, and bows to the 

people, and says the great tragedy will be performed only two 

nights more, on accounts of pressing London engagements, 

where the seats is all sold aready for it in Drury Lane; and 

then he makes them another bow, and says if he has succeeded in 

pleasing them and instructing them, he will be deeply obleeged 

if they will mention it to their friends and get them to come and 
see it. 


Twenty people sings out: 

“ What, is it over ? Is that aU ? ” 

The duke says « yes.” Then there was a fine time. Every, 
body sings outsold,” and rose up mad, and was agoing foi 
that stage and them tragedians. But a big, fine-looking mar 
jumps up on a bench, and shouts: 

“Hold on! Just a word, gentlemen.” They stopped tc 
hsten. We are sold-mighty badly sold.' But we don’t 
want to be the laughing-stock of this whole town, I reckon, 
^ never hem the last of this thing as long as we live. Wo! 
matwe wanys to go out of here quiet, and talk this show up. 
and eU theresj of the town ! Then we’U all be in the same boat 
Am t to sensible ? (- Yon bet it is !-the jedge is right!" 

Tv'^rfl^ a word about 

Le^ht tragedy*!’-<> 




228 THE AEVENTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINH. 


Next day you couldn’t hear nothing M-ound that town but 
how splendid that show was. House was jammed again, that 
night, and we sold this crowd the same way. When me and 
the king and the duke got home to the raft, we all had a 
supper; and by-and-by, about midnight, they made Jim and 



THEIB POCKETS BULGED. 


me back her out and float her down the middle of the river and 
fetch her in and hide her about two mile below town. 

The third night the house was crammed again—and they 
warn’t new-comers, this time, but people that was at the show 
the other two nights. T stood by the duke at the door, and I 





TtOYAt COMPAniSOWS. 


22fi 

see that every man that went in had his pockets bulging, oi 
something muffled up under his coat—and I see it warn’t no 
perfumery neither, not by a long sight. I smelt sickly eggs by 
the barrel, and rotten cabbages, and such things; and if I know 
the signs of a dead cat being around, and I bet I do, there was 
sixty-four of them went in. I shoved in there for a minute, 
but it was too vaiious for me, I couldn’t stand it. Well, when 
the place couldn’t hold no more people, the duke he give a 
fellow a quarter and told him to tend door for him a minute, 
and then he started around for the stage door, I after him ; hut 
the minute we turned the corner and was in the dark, he says: 

“ Walk fast, now, till you get away from the houses, and 
then shin for the raft like the dickens was after you! ” 

I done it, and he done the same. We struck the raft at the 

same time, and in less than two seconds we was gliding down 

stream, all dark and still, and edging towards the middle of 

the river, nobody saying a word. I reckoned the poor king 

was in for a gaudy time of it with the audience; but nothing 

of the sort; pretty soon he crawls out from under the wigwam, 
and says : 

“ Well, how’d the old thing pan out this time, Duke ? ” 

He hadn’t been up town at all. 

We never showed a light till we was about ten mile below 
that village. Then we lit up and had a supper, and the king 
and the duke fairly laughed their bones loose over the way they’d 
served them people. The duke says: 

“Greenhorns, flatheads! 1 knew the first house would 
^ep mum and let the rest of the town get roped in; and I 
faew theyd lay for ns the third night, and consider it was 
Acrr turn now. M'ell, it fa their turn, and I’d give something 
to know how much they take for it. I woiUd just like to know 
ow they re putting in their opportunity. They can turn it 
into a picnio if they want tn-they brought plenty provision*.” 



230 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

Them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixtj-five 
dollars in that three nights. I never see money hauled in by 
the wagon-load like that, before. 

By-and-by, when they was asleep and snoring, Jim says: 

“ Don’t it ’sprise you, de way dem kings carries on, Huck ? ” 

“No,” I says, “it don’t.” 

“ Why don’t it, Huck ? ” 

“ Well, it don’t, because it’s in the breed. I reckon they’re 
all alike.” 

“But, Huck, dese kings o’ oum is regular rapscallions; 
dat’s jist what dey is ; dey’s reglar rapscallions.” 

“ Well, that’s what I’m a-saying; all kings is mostly rap¬ 
scallions, as fur as I can make out.” 

“ Is dat so ? ” 

“ You read about them once—you’ll see. Look at Henry 
the Eight; this’n’s a Sunday-School Superintendent to him. 
And look at Charles Second, and Louis Fourteen, and Louis 
fifteen, and James Second, and Edward Second, and Richard 
Third, and forty more; besides all them Saxon heptarchies 
that used to rip around so in old times and raise Cain. My» 
you ought to seen old Henry the Eight when he was in 
bloom. He was a blossom. He used to marry a new wife 
every day, and chop off her head next morning. And he 
would do it just as indifferent as if he was ordering up eggs. 

* Fetch up Nell Gwynn,’ he says. They fetch her up. Next 
morning, ‘ Chop off her head ! * And they chop it off. * Fetch 
up Jane Shore,* he says; and up she comes. Next morning 
‘ Chop off her head ’—and they chop it off. ‘ Ring up Fair 
Rosamun.’ Fair Rosamun answers the bell. Next morning, 

‘ Chop off her head.’ And he made every one of them tell him 
a tale every night; and he kept that up till he had hogged a 
thousand and one tales that way, and then he put them all in a 
book, and called it Domesday Book—which was a good name 



ROYAL COMPARISONS. 


23i 


And stated the case. You don’t know kings, Jim, but I know 
them j and this old rip of ourn is one of the cleanest I’ve 
struck in history. Well, Henry he takes a notion he wants to 
get up some trouble with this country. How does he go at it 
—give notice?—give the country a show? No, All of a 



HENRY THE EIGHTH IN BOSTON HABDOtlB. 


sudden he heaves all the tea in Boston Harbour overboard, and 
whacks out a declaration of independence, and daies them to 
TOme on. That was his style—he never give anybody a chance. 
He had suspicions of his father, the Duke of Wellington. Well 
what did he do?—ask him to show up ? No—drownded him 



232 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


in a butt of mamsey, like a cat. S’pose people left money 
laying around where he was—what did he do ? He collared it. 
S’pose he contracted to do a thing j and you paid him, and 
didn’t set down there and see that he done it—what did he do? 
He always done the other thing. S pose he opened his mouth 
—what then? If he didn’t shut it up powerful quick, he’d 
lose a lie, every time. That’s the kind of a bug Henry was; 
and if we’d a had him along ’stead of our kings, he’d a fooled 
that town a heap worse than ourn done. I don’t say that oum 
is lambs, because they ain’t, when you come right down to the 
cold facts; but they ain’t nothing to that old ram, anyway. 
All I say is, kings is kings, aud you got to make allowances. 
Take them all around, they’re a mighty ornery lot. It’s the 
way they’re raised.” 

“ But dis one do smell so like de nation, Huck,” 

Well, they all do, Jim. MVe can’t help the way a king 
smells ; history don’t tell no way.” 

“ Now de duke, he’s a tolerble likely man, in some ways.” 

“ Yes, a duke’s different. But not very different. This 
one’s a middling hard lot for a duke. When he’s drunk, there 
ain’t no near-sighted man could tell him from a king.” 

“ Well, anyways, I doan’ hanker for no mo’ un um, Huck. 
Dese is all I kin stan’.” 

“ It’s the way 1 feel, too, Jim. But we’ve got them on our 
hands, and we got to remember what they are, and make allow¬ 
ances, Sometimes I wish we could hear of a country that’s out 
of kings.” 

What was the use to tell Jim these wam’t real kings and 
dukes ? It wouldn’t a done no good ; and besides, it was just 
as I said; you couldn’t tell them from the real kind. 

I went to sleep, and Jim didn’t call me when it was my 
turn. He often done that. When I waked up, just at day¬ 
break, he was setting there with his head down betwixt hia 



JIM GETS HOMESICK. 


238 


knees, moauing and movirning to himself. I didn’t take 
notice, nor let on. I knowed what it was about. He was 
thinking about his wife and his children, away up yonder, 
and he was low and homesick; because he hadn’t ever been 
away from home before in his life j and I do believe he 
cared just as much for bis people as white folks does for 
ther’n. It don’t seem natural, but 1 reckon it’s so. He 
was often moaning and mourning that way, nights, when he 
judged I was asleep, and saying, “ Po’ little ’Lizabeth! po’ 
little Johnny ! it’s mighty hard ; I spec* I ain’t ever gwyne to 
see you no mo’, no mo’! ” He was a mighty good nigger, Jim 
was. 

But this time I somehow got to talking to him about his 
wife and young ones; and by-and-by he says: 

“ What makes me feel so bad dis time, ’uz bekase I hear 
sumpn over yonder on de bank like a whack, er a slam, while 
ago, en it mine me er de time I treat my little ’Lizabeth so 
ornery. She wam’t on’y ’bout fo’ year ole, en she tuck de 
skyailet-fever, en had a powful rough spell; but she got well, 
en one day she was a-stannin’ aroun’, en I says to her, I says: 

“ ‘ Shet de do’.’ 

She never done it; jis’ stood dah, kiner smilin’ up at me. 
■It make me mad; en I says agin, mighty loud, I says: 

« ‘ Doan’ you hear me ?—shet de do’ I ’ 

« She jis’ stood de same way, kiner s milin ’ up. I was 
a-bilin’ I I says t 

“ ‘ I lay I make you mine! ’ 

“ En^ wid dat I fetch’ her a slap side de head dat sont her 
a spraw n. Den I went into de yuther room, en ’uz gone 
bout ten minutes; en when I come back, dah was dat do’ 
t-stannm open yit^ en dat chile stannin’ mos’ right in it. 
a-lookin doTO and mournin’, en de tears runnin’ down. My, but 
1 wuzm^^, I was agivyne for de chUe, but jis’ den—it was a do’ 


1 



254 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


dat open innerds—^jis’ den, ’long come de wind en slam it to, 
behine de chile, ker-6/am/—en my Ian’, de chile never move’I 
My hreff mos’ hop outer me; en I feel so—so—I doan’ know 
how I feel, I crope out, all a-tremblin*, en crope aroun’ en 
open de do’ easy en slow, en poke my head in behine de chile, 
sof* en still, en all uv a sudden, I says pow / jis’ as loud as I 
could yell. She never budge! Oh, Huck, I bust out a-cryin* 
en grab her up in my arms, en say, ‘ Oh, de po’ little thing! 
de Lord God Amighty fogive po’ ole Jim, kaze he never gwyne 
to fogive hisself as long’s he live! ’ Oh, she was plumb deef 
en dumb, Huck, plumb deef en dumb—en I’d ben a-treat’n 
her so I ” 



Ov/T 

CHAPTER XXIV.

Ne^ day, towards night, we 
laid up under a little 
willow tow-head out in 
the middle, where there 
waa a village on each 
side of the river, and the 
duke and the king begun 
to lay out a plan for 
working them towns. 
Jim he spoke to the 
duke, and said he hoped 
it wouldn’t take but a 
few hours, because it got 
mighty heavy and tire¬ 
some to him when he 
had to lay all day in 
the wigwam tied with 
the rope. You see, when 

, , we left him all alone we 

W to tie him, because if anybody happened on him all by 

himself and not tied, it wouldn’t look much Uke he was a 

tuMTOy mgger, you know. So the duke said it was kind of 

^ to have to lay roped aU day, and he’d cipher out some way 
to get around it. r j 


HAaMLIiSA. 








JIM IN ROYAL ROBES. 


237 


told me to put mine on. I done it, of course. The king’s duds 
was all black, and he did look real swell and starchy. I never 
knowed how clothes could change a body before. Why, before, 
he looked like the omeriest old rip that ever was; but now, 
when he’d take off his new white beaver and make a bow and 
do a smile, he looked that grand and good and pious that you’d 
say he had walked right out of the ark, and maybe was old 
Leviticus himself. Jim cleaned up the canoe, and I got my 
paddle ready. There was a big steamboat laying at the shore 
away up under the point, about three mile above town— 
been there a couple of hours, taking on freight. Says the 
king; 

“ Seein’ how I’m dressed, I reckon maybe I better arrive 
down from St. Louis or Cincinnati, or some other big place, 
Go for the steamboat, Huckleberry; we’ll come down to the 
village on her.” 

I didn’t have to be ordered twice, to go and take a steam¬ 
boat ride. I fetched the shore a half a mile above the village, 
and then went scooting along the bluff bank in the easy water. 
Pretty soon we come to a nice innocent-looking young country 
jake setting on a log swabbing the sweat off of his face, for it ' 

was powerful warm weather; and he had a couple of big carpet-’ 
bags by him. 

“ Run her nose in shore,” says the king. I done it. «Wher’ 

you bound for, young man ? ” 

“ For the steamboat; going to Orleans.” 

Git aboard, says the king. “ Hold on a minute, my ser¬ 
vant ’ll he’p you with them bags. Jump out and he’p the gen¬ 
tleman, Adolphus ”—meaning me, I see. 

I done so, and then we all three started on again. The 
young chap was mighty thankful; said it was tough work 
toting his baggage such weather. He asked the king where 
e was going, and the king told him he’d come down the river 



238 TRE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

and landed at tte other village this morning, and now he wae 
going up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up there. 
The young fellow says: 

“When I first see you, I says to myself, ^It’s Mr. Wilks, 
sure, and he come mighty near getting here in time.* But 
then I says again, ‘ No, I reckon it ain’t him, or else he 
wouldn’t be paddling up the river,* You ainH him, are youf 


4 


9 

✓ 


ADOLPHUB. 



“ No, my name’s Blodgett—Elexander Blodgett —Reverend 
Elexander Blodgett, I s’pose I must say, as I’m one o’ the 
Lord’s poor servants. But still I’m jist as able to be sorry 
for Mr. Wilks for not arriving in time, all the same, if he*« 
missed anything by it—which I hope he hasn’t.** 

“ Well, he don’t miss any property by it, because he'll get 
that all right} but he’s missed seeing his brother Peter die— 
which he mayn’t mind, nobody can tell as to that—^but hw 



GETTING INFORMATION. 


m 


brother would a give anything in this world to see him before 
he died j never talked about nothing else all these three weeks; 
hadn’t seen him since they was boys together—and hadn’t ever 
seen his brother William at all—that’s the deef and dumb one 
—^William ain’t more than thirty or thirty-five. Peter and 
George was the only ones that come out here ; George was the 
married brother; him and his wife both died last year, 
Harvey and William’s the only ones that’s left now; and, as 1 
was saying, they haven’t got here in time.” 

“ Did anybody send ’em word ? ” 

“ Oh, yes; a month or two ago, when Peter was first took ; 
because Peter said then that he sorter felt like he wam’t going 
to get well this time. You see, he was pretty old, and George’s 
g yirls was too young to be much company for him, except Mary 
Jane the red-headed one ; and so he was kinder lonesome after 
George and his wife died, a|id didn’t seem to care much to live. 
He most desperately wanted to see Harvey—and William too, 
for that matter—because he was one of them kind that can’t 
bear to make a will. He left a letter behind for Harvey, and 
said he’d told in it where his money was hid, and how he wanted 
the rest of the property divided up so George’s g’yirla would be 

all nght-for George didn’t leave nothing. And that letter 
was all they could get him to put a pen to.” 

“ do you reckon Harvey don’t come ? Wher’ does he 
live ? ” 

“ Oh, he Uves in England-SheeSeld-preaches there- 

hasn t ever been in this country. He hasn’t had any too much 
time-^nd besides he mightn’t a got the letter at all, you 


^ v’ a lived to see his brothers, 

poor soul. Yon going to Orleans, you say ? ’’ 

noTt'W !! '’“a “ a ship, 

e nesday, for Ryo Janeero, where my uncle lives.” 


HE PAinLY EMPTIED THAT YOUKO FELLOW. 


t 


« WeU, they could be worse off. Old Peter had friends, 
and they ain’t going to let them come to no harm. There s 
Hobson, the Babtis’ preacher; and Deacon Lot Hovey, 

Ben Rucker, and Abner Shackleford, and Levi Bell, the law^r, 
and Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the widow 
and—well, there’s a lot of them ; but these are the ones tha 
Peter was thickest with, and used to write about sometimes, 









GMTTIKO INFOUMATION. 


241 


when tie wrote home; so Harvey ’ll know where to look for 
friends when he get’s here.” 

Well, the old man he went on asking questions till he jn:«t 
fairly emptied that young fellow. Blamed if he didn't in(|Qire 
about everybody and everything in that blessed town, and all 
about all the Wilkses; and about Peter’s business—which was 
a tanner; and about George’s—which was a carpenter; and 
about Harvey’s—which was a dissentering minister ; and so on, 
and so on. Then h e says: 

“ What did you want to walk all the way up to the steam¬ 
boat for ? ” 


^ “Because she’s a big Orleans boat, and I was afeard she 
mightn’t stop there. When they’re deep they won’t stop for 
a hail. A Cincinnati boat will, but this is a St. Louis one.” 

“ Was Peter WUks well off? ” 

^ “ Oh, yes, pretty well off. He had houses and land, and 

Its reckoned he left three or four thousand in cash hid up 
som’ers.” ^ 


“ When did you say he died ? ” 

“ I didn’t say, but it was last night." 

“ Funeral to-morrow, likely ? ” ° 

Yes, bout the middle of the day.” 

“Well, it’s all terrible sad; but we’ve aU got to go, one 

[r® ", to do is to be prepared ; 

then we re all right. ’ ^ 

“Yes, sir, it’s the best waj. Ma used to always say that.” 
we struck the boat, she was about done loading, and 
pretty soon she got off. 'The king never said nothing about 

IZe the° W ’ 

place, then he got ashore, and says; ■ 

and*'fh*«tol> the duke up here 
the new carpet-bags. And if he’s gone over to t’othL side! 


•s>- 



*J42 TRi ARFENTtriiES OP HVCRLEBERRY FINE. 


go over there and git him. And tell him to git himself up 
regardless. Shove along, now.” 

I see what he was up to; but I never said nothing, of course. 
WTien I got back with the duke, we hid the canoe and then 
they set down on a log, and the king told hiin everything, just 
like the young fellow had said it—every last word of it. And 
all the time he was a doing it, he tried to talk like an EngUsh- 
man j and he done it pretty well too, for a slouch. I can’t imi¬ 
tate him, and so I ain’t agoing to try to; but he really done it 
pretty good. Then he says: 

“ How are ydu on the deef and dumb, Bilgewater ? ” 

The duke said, leave him alone for that; said he had 
played a deef and dumb person on the histrionic boards. So 

then they waited for a steamboat. 

About the middle of the afternoon a couple of little boats 
come along, but they didn’t come from high enough up the 
river; but at last there was a big one, and they hailed her. 
She sent out her yawl, and we went aboard, and she was from 
Cincinnati; and when they found we only wanted to go four 
or five mile, they was booming mad, and give us a cussing, and 
said they wouldn’t land us. But the king was calm. He 

says: 

“ If gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece, to 
be took on and put off in a yawl, a steamboat kin afford to 
carry ’em, can’t it ? ” 

So they softened down and said it was all right; and when 
we got to the village, they yawled us ashore. About two dozen 
men flocked down, when they see the yawl a coming ; and when 

the king says— 

“ Kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher Mr. Peter Wuiw 
lives ? ” they give a glance at one another, and nodded their 
heads, as much as to say, » What d’ I tell you ? ” Then one of 
them says, kind of soft and gentle: 



FAMILY GRIEF. 


243 


“I’m sorry, sir, but the best we can do is to tell you where 
he did live yesterday evening.” 

Sudden as winking, the ornery old cretur went all to smash, 
and fell up against the man, and put his chin on his shoulder, 
and cried down his back, and says; 





“ALAS I OUB POOB BBOTHEB.'" 


“Alas, alast our poor brother—gone, and we never got to 
see him ; oh, it’s too, too hard I ” 

Then he tons around, blubbering, and makes a lot of idiotio 
signs to the duke on his hands, and hlamed if he didn’t drop a 

anc^ust out a-ciying. If they wam’t the beateuest 
WO fi^uds, that ever I struck. 

WeU, the men gathered around, and sympathised with them. 


carpet-bag 
lot, them t 


244 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


and said all sorts of kind things to them, and carried their 
carpet-bags up the hill for them, and let them lean on them 
and cry, and told the king all about his brother’s last moments, 
and the king he told it all over again on his hands to the duke, 
and both of them took on about that dead tanner like the/d 
lost the twelve disciples. Well, if ever I struck anything like 
it, I’m a nigger. It was enough to make a body ashamed of 
the human race. 




“ YOU BET IT IS.” 

CHAPTER XXV.

news was all over town in two 
minutes, and you could see 
the people tearing down on 
the run, from every which 
way, some of them putting on 
their coats as they come. 
Pretty soon we was in the 
middle of a crowd, and the 
noise of the tramping was like 
a soldier-march. Tlie windows 
and door-yards was full; and 
every minute somebody would 
say, over a fence: 

“Is it themj” 

And somebody trotting 
along with the gang would 
answer back and say: 

“ You bet it is.” 


^ When we got to the house, 

the ^reet in front of it was packed, and the three girls was 

Btandmg in the door. Mary Jane was red-headed, but that 

dont make no difference, she was most awful beautiful, and 

her face and her eyes was all lit up Uke glory, she was so glad 

her uncles was come. The king he spread his arms, 'md Mary 


246 THE AEVENTUEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


Jane she jumped for them, and the hare-lip jumped for the 
duke, and there they had it I Everybody most, leastways 
women, cried for joy to see them meet again at last and have 
such good times. 

Then the king he hunched the duke, private—I see him 
do it—and then he looked around and see the coffin, over in 
the comer on two chairs; so then, him and the duke, with a 
hand across each other’s shoulder, and t’other hand to their 
eyes, walked slow and solemn over there, everybody dropping 
back to give them room, and all the talk and noise stopping, 
people saying “ Sh ! ” and all the men taking their hats off and 
drooping their heads, so you could hear a pin fall. And when 
they got there, they bent over and looked in the coffin, and 
took one sight, and then they burst out a crying so you could 
a heard them to Orleans, most; and then they put their arms 
around each other’s necks, and hung their chins over each 
other’s shoulders; and then for three minutes, or maybe four, 
I never see two men leak the way they done. And mind you, 
everybody was doing the same ; and the place was that damp I 
never see anything like it. Then one of them got on one side 
of the coffin, and t’other on t’other side, and they kneeled down 
and rested their foreheads on the coffin, and let on to pray all 
to theirselves. Well, when it come to that, it worked the crowd 
like you never see anything like it, and so everybody broke 
down and went to sobbing right out loud—the poor girls, too; 
and every woman, nearly, went up to the girls, without saying 
a word, and kissed them, solemn, on the forehead, and then 
put their hand on their head, and looked up towards the sky, 
with the tears running down, and then busted out and went 
off sobbing and swabbing, and give the next woman a show, f 
never see anything so disgusting. 

Well, by-and-by the king he gets up and comes forward a 
little, and works himself up and slobbers out a speech, all full 



SINGINO THE " DOXOLOJER:' 247 

of tears and flapdoodle about its being a sore trial for him and 
his poor brother to lose the diseased, and to miss seeing diseased 
alive, after the long journey of four thousand mile, but it’s a 
trial that’s sweetened and sanctified to us by this dear sympathy 
and these holy tears, and so he thanks them out of hie heart 
and out of his brother’s heart, because out of their mouths 



they can’t, words being too weak and cold, and all that kind 
of rot and slush, till it was just sickening; and then he blubbers 
out a pious goody-goody Amen, and turns himself loose and 
goes to crying fit to bust. 

And the minute the words was out of his mouth somebody 
over in the crowd struck up the doxolojer,and everybody joined 






248 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

in with all their might, and it just warmed you up and made 
you feel as good as church letting out. Music is a good thing; 
and after all that soul-butter and hogwash, I never see it 
freshen up things so, and sound so honest and bully. 

Then the king begins to work his jaw again, and says how 
him and his nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal 
friends of the family would take supper here with them this 
evening, and help set up with the ashes of the diseased; and 
says if his poor brother laying yonder could speak, he knows 
who he would name, for they was names that was very dear to 
him, and mentioned often in his letters; and so he will name 
the same, to wit, as follows, viz.;—Rev. Mr. Hobson, and 
Deacon Lot Hovey, and Mr. Ren Rucker, and Abner Shackle¬ 
ford, and Levi Bell, and Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the 
widow Bartley. 

Rev. Hobson and Dr. Robinson was down to the end of the 
town, a-hunting together ; that is, I mean the doctor was ship¬ 
ping a sick man to t’other world, and the preacher was pinting 
him right. Lawyer Bell was away up to Louisville on some 
business. But the rest was on hand, and so they all come and 
shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him; 
and then they shook hands with the duke, and didn’t say no¬ 
thing but just kept a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a 
passel of sapheads whilst he made all sorts of signs with his 
hands and said “ Goo-goo—goo-goo-goo,” all the time, like a 
baby that can’t talk. 

So the king he blatted along, and managed to inquire about 
{)retty much everybody and dog in town, by his name, and 
mentioned all sorts of little things that happened one time or 
another in the town, or to George’s family, or to Peter; and 
he always let on that Peter wrote him the things, but that was 
a lie, he got every blessed one of them out of that young flat- 
head that we canoed up to the steamboat. 



» n'^JS CAI\r SPARE IT” 


249 


Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left 
behind, and the king he read it out loud and cried over it. It 
give the dwelling-house and three thousand dollars, gold, to 
the girls; and it give the tanyard (which was doing a good 
business), along with some other houses and land (worth about 
seven thousand),and three thousand dollars in gold to Harveyand 
William, and told where the six thousand cash was hid, down 
cellar. So these two frauds said they’d go and fetch it up, and 
have everything square and above-board ; and told me to come 
with a candle. We shut the cellar door behind us, and when 
they found the bag they spilt it out on the floor, and it was a 
lovely sight, all them yaller-boys. My, the way the king’s 

eyes did shine! He slaps the duke on the shoulder, and 
says; 


“ Oh, ihie ain’t bully, nor noth’n! Oh, no, I reckon not! 
Why, Biljy, it beats the Nonesuch, don't it ? ” 

The duke allowed it did. They pawed the yaller-boys, and 
sifted them through their fingers and let them jingle down on 
the floor j and the king says: 

“ It ain’t no use talkin’; bein’ brothers to a rich dead man, 
and representatives of furrin heirs that’s got left, is the line 
for you and me, Bilge. Thish-yer comes of trust’n to Provi¬ 
dence. It’s the best way, in the long run. IVe tried ’em all, 
and ther’ ain’t no better way.” 

Most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile, and 
t^k It on trust; but no. they must count it. So they counts 
it, and It comes out four hundred and fifteen dollars short. Says 


“ Bern him, I wonder what he done with that four hundred 
and fifteen dollars ? ” 

They worried over that a whUe. and ransaeked all around for 
it» Ihen the duke s^js • 

“ Well, he was a pretty sick man, and Ukely he made a 



850 THE ADVEyrURES OF HUCKLEBERRy FINE. 

mistake—I reckon that’s the way of it. The best way’s to let 
it go, and keep still about it. We can spare it.” 

‘^Oh, shucks, yes, we can spare it. I don’t k’yer noth’n 
’bout that—it’s the count I’m thinkin’ about. We want to be 
awful square and open and above-board, here, you know. 



MAKING DP THE “ DKFI'ISIT. 


want to lug this h-yer money upstairs and count it before 
everybody—then ther’ ain’t noth’n suspicious. But when the 
dead man says ther’s six thous’n dollars, you know, we dont 

won’t to-” n; " 

** Hold on,” says the duke. “ Less make up the defnsit 

—and he begun to haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket. 




AWFUL SQUARE. 


261 


“ It’s a most amaz’n’ good idea, duke—you Jiave got a 
rattlin’ clever head on you,” says the king. “ Blest if the old 
Nonesuch ain’t a heppin’ us out agin ”—and he begun to haul 
out yaller-jackets and stack them up. 

It most busted them, but they made up the six thousand 
clean and clear.. 

“Say,” says the duke, “I got another idea. Le’s go up¬ 
stairs and count this money, and then take and give it to the 
girls." 

“G-ood land, duke, lemme hug you! It’s the most dazz¬ 
ling idea ’at ever a man struck. You liave cert’nly got the 
most astonishin’ head I ever see. Oh, this is the boss dodge, 
ther’ ain’t no mistake ’bout it. Let ’em fetch along their sus¬ 
picions now, if they want to—this’ll lay ’em out.” 

When we got up stairs, everybody gethered around the 
table, and the king he counted it and stacked it up, three hun¬ 
dred dollars in a pile—twenty elegant little piles. Everyboily 
looked hungry at it, and licked their chops. Then they raked 
it into the bag again, and I see the king begiu to swell himself 
up for another speech. He says: 

“ Friends all, my poor brother that lays yonder has done 

generous by them that’s left behind in the vale of sorrers. He 

has done generous by these-yer poor little lambs that he loved 

and sheltered, and that’s left fatherless and motherless. Yes, 

and we that knowed him, knows that he would a done mcrre 

generous by ’em if he hadn’t ben afeard o’ woundin’ his dear 

Wilham and me. Now, wovJMt he ? Ther’ ain’t no question 

T)out it, in my mind. Well, then—what kind o’ brothers would 

it be, that’d stand in his way at sech a time ? And what kind 

o uncles would it be that’d rob—yes, roh —sech poor sweet 

lambs as these ’at he loved so, at sech a time ? If I know 

William—and I mnk I do—he—well, I’ll jest ask him.” He 

turns around and begins a lot of signs to the duke 

% 



262 THE ABVEETURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

with his hands; and the duke he looks at him stupid and 
leather-headed a while, then all of a sudden he seems to catch 
his meaning, and jumps for the king, goo-gooing with all his 
might for joy, and hugs him about hfteen times before he lets 
up. Then the king says, “ I knowed it; 1 reckon tJuU ’ll con- 



OOINO FOR HUI. 

vince anybody the way he feels about it. Here, Mary Jane, 
Susan, Joanuer, take the money—take it aU. It’s the gift of 
him that lays yonder, cold but joyful.” 

Mary Jane she went for him, Susan and the hare-lip went 
for the duke, and then such another hugging and kissing I 
never see yet. And everybody crowded up with the tears lO 



FUNERAL OROIBS. 


263 


their eyes, and most shook the hands o£F of them frauds, sayinj’ 
all the time: 

“ You dear good souls!—how lovely !—how could you ! ” 

Well, then, pretty soon all hands got to talking about the 
diseased again, and how good be was, and what a loss be was, 
and all that; and before long a big iron-jawed man worked 
himself in there from outside, and stood a listening and look¬ 
ing, and not saying anything; and nobody saying anything to 
him either, because the king was talking and they was all busy 
listening. The king was saying—in the middle of something 
he’d started in on— 

«—they bein’ partickJer friends o’ the diseased. That’s 
why they’re invited here this evenin’; but to-morrow we want 
all to come—everybody ; for he respected everybody, he liked 
everybody, and so it’s fitten that his funeral orgies sh’d be 
public.” 

And so he went a-mooning on and on, liking to hear himself 
talk, and every little while he fetched in his funeral orgies 
again, till the duke he couldn’t stand it no more ; so he writes 
on a little scrap of paper, “ ohseqaies^ you old fool,” and folds 
it up and goes to goo-gooing and reaching it over people’s 
heads to him. The king he reads it, and puts it in his pocket, 
and says: 

“ Poor William, aflSicted as he is, his keart's aluz right. 
Asks me to invite everybody to come to the funeral—wants me 

to make em all welcome. But he needn’t a worried—it was 
jest what I was at.” 

Then he weaves along again, perfectly calm, and goes to 

dropping in his fiineral orgies again every now and then, just 

like he done before. And when he done it the third time, he 
says: 

I say orgies, not because it’s the common term, because 
it ain’t^obsequiea bein’ the common term—but because orgies 



254 THE ADVENTURES OR HUCKLEBERRY Film. 


is the right term. Obsequies ain’t used in England no more, 
now—it’s gone out. We say orgies now, in England;' Orgies 
is better, because it means the thing you’re after, more exact 
It’s a word that’s made up out’n the Greek orgo^ outside, open, 
abroad; and the Hebrew jeemm^ to plant, cover up; hence 
in^er. So, you see, funeral orgies is an open er public funeral.” 

He was the worst I ever struck. Well, the iron-jawed man 
he laughed right in his face. Everybody was shocked. Every¬ 
body says, “ Why doctor ! ” and Abner Shackleford says; 

“ Why, Robinson, hain’t you heard the news ? This is 
Harvey Wilks.” 

The king he smiled eager, and shoved out his flapper, and 
says: 

“ la it my poor brother’s dear good friend and physician ? 

I-” 

“ Keep your hands oflf of me! ” says the doctor. “ You 
talk like an Englishman —donH you ? It’s the worse imitation 
I ever heard. You Peter Wilks’ brother. You’re a fraud, that’s 
what you are! ” 

Well, how they all took on! They crowded around the 
doctor, and tried to quiet him down, and tried to explain to 
him, and tell him how Harvey’d showed in forty ways that he 
waa Harvey, and knowed everybody by name, and the names 
of the very dogs, and begged and begged him not to hurt Har¬ 
vey’s feeUngs and the poor girls’ feelings, and all that; but it 
warn’t no use, he stormed right along, and said any man that 
pretended to be an Englishman and couldn’t imitate the lingo 
no better than what he did, was a fraud and a liar. The poor 
girls was hanging to the king and dying; and all of a sudden 
the doctor ups and turns on them. He says: 

“I was your father’s friend, and I’m your friend; and I 
warn you as a friend, and an honest one, that wants to protect 
you and keep you out of harm and trouble, to turn your backs 



A 'BAD ll^VESTMENT. 


266 


on that scoundrel, and have nothing to do with him, the igno¬ 
rant tramp, with his idiotic Greek and Hebrew as he calls it. 
He is the thinnest kind of an impostor—has come here with a 
lot of empty names and facts which he has picked up somewheres, 
and you take them tot “proof8^ and are helped to fool yourselves 



TUB DOCTOB. 


by these foolish friends here, who ought to know better. Mary 

^ne ^ ilks, you know me for your friend, and for your unselfish 

^end, tw. Now Usten to me; turn this pitiful rascal ouU-I 
beg you to do it. W.m you ? ” 



256 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ Here is my answer.” She hove up the bag of money and 
put it in the king’s hands, and says, “ Take this six thousand 
dollars, and invest for me and my sisters any way you want to 
and don’t give us no receipt for it.” 

Then she put her arm around the king on one side, and 
Susan and the harelip done the same on the other. Everybody 
clapped their hands and stomped on the floor like a perfect 
storm, whilst the king held up his head and smiled proud. 
The doctor says: 

“ All right, I wash my hands of the matter. But I warn 
you all that a time’s coining when you’re going to feel sick 
whenever you think of this day ”—and away he went. 

“ All right, doctor,” says the king, kinder mocking him, 
“ we’ll try and get ’em to send for you ”—which made them alJ 
laugh, and they said it was a prime good hit. 



TUK BAG or MOIVET. 








THB CUBBY. 

CHAPTER XXVI.

when they was all gone, 
the king he asks Mary 
Jane how they was off 
for spare rooms, and she 
said she had one spare 
room, which would do 
for Uncle William, and 
she’d give her own room 
to Uncle Harvey, which 
was a little bigger, and 
she would turn into the 
room with her sisters 
and sleep on a cot; and 
up garret was a little 
cubby, with a pallet in 
it. The king said the 
cubby would do lor his 
valley—meaning me. 

So Mary Jane took us 


up, and she showed them their rooms, which was plain but 
nice. She said she’d have her frocks and a lot of other traps 
took out of her room if they was in Uncle Harvey’s way, but he 
said they wam’t. The frocks was hung along the wall, and 
before them was a curtain made out of calico that hung dowp to 


a 


268 THE ADVENTURES ON BUCELERERRY FINN. 

the floor. There was an old hair trunk in one corner, and a 
guitar box in another, and all sorts of little knick-knacks and 
jimcracks around, like girls brisken up a room with. The king 
said it was all the more homely and more pleasanter for these 
fixings, and so don’t disturb them. The duke’s room was pretty 
small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby. 

That night they had a big supper, and all them men and 
women was there, and I stood behind the king and the duke s 
chairs and waited on them, and the niggers waited on the rest. 
Mary Jane she set at the head of the table, with Susan along¬ 
side of her, and said how bad the biscuits was, and how mean 
the preserves was, and how ornery and tough the fined chickens 
was—and all that kind of rot, the way women always do for to 
force out compliments ; and the people all knowed everything 
was tip-top, and said so—said “ How do you get biscuits to 
brown so nice ? ” and “ Where, for the land’s sake, did you get 
these amax’n pickles ? ” and all that kind of humbug talky-talk, 
just the way people always does at a supper, you know. 

And when it was all done, me and the hare-lip had supper 
in the kitchen off of the leavings, whilst the others was helping 
the niggers clean up the things. The hare-lip she got to 
pumping me about England, and blest if I didn’t think the ice 
was getting mighty thin, sometimes. She says: 

“ Did you ever see the king ? ” 

“ Who ? William Fourth ? Well, I bet I have—he goes to 
our church.” I knowed he was dead years ago, but I never let 
on. So when I says he goes to our church, she says: 

“ What—regular ? ” 

<sYes—regular. His pew’s right over opposite ourn—on 

t’other side the pulpit.” 

I thought he lived in London ? ” 

“ Well, he does. Where would he live ? ” 

■< But I thought you lived in Sheffield ? ” 



A PIOUS KINO. 


369 


I see I was up a stump. I had to let on to get choked with 
a chicken bone, so as to get time to think bow to get down 
again. Then I says: 

“ I mean he goes to our church regular when he’s in 
SheflBeld. That’s only in the summer-time, when he comes 
there to take the sea baths.” 



SUPPER WITH THE HARB>LXF. 


“Why, how you talk—Sheffield ain’t on the sea.” 
“ Well, who said it was ? ” 

“ Why, you did.” 

'* T dddn% nuther,” 

“ You did 1” 



260 THE ADVEXTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


«I didn’t.” 

“ You did.” 

I never said nothing of the kind.” 

“ Well, what did you say, then ? ” 

“ Said he come to take the sea baths —that’s what I said.” 

“ Well, then! how’s he going to take the sea baths if it 
ain’t on the sea ? ” 

Looky here,” I says; “ did you ever see any Congress 
water ? ” 

» Yes.” 

“ Well, did you have to go to Congress to get it? ” 

“Why, no.” 

“ Well, neither does William Fourth have to go to the sea 
to get a sea bath.” 

“ How does he get it, then ? ” 

“ Gets it the way people down here gets Congress water— 
in barrels. There in the palace at Sheffield they’ve got furnaces, 
and he wants his water hot. They can’t bile that amount of 
water away off there at the sea. They haven’t got no conveni¬ 
ences for it.” 

“Oh, I see, now. You might a said that in the first place 
and saved time.” 

When she said that, I see I was out of the woods again, 
and so I was comfortable and glad. Next, she says: 

“ Do you go to church, too ? ” 

« Yes—regular.” 

“ Where do you set ? ” 

“ Why, in our pew.” 

“ Whose pew ? ” 

“ Why, ourn —your Uncle Harvey’s.” 

« His’n ? What does he want with a pew ? ” 

“ Wants it to set in. What did you reckon he wanted with 



THE KINO'S CLERGY, 


261 


Why, I thought he’d be in the pulpit.” 

Rot him, I forgot he was a preacher. I see I was up a 
stump again, so I played another chicken bone and got another 
think. Then I says: 

“ Blame it, do you suppose there ain’t but one preacher to a 
church ? ” 

“ Why, what do they want with more ? ” 

“What!—to preach before a king! I never see such a girl 
as you. They don’t have no less than seventeen.” 

“Seventeen ! My land! Why, I wouldn’t set out such a 
string as that, not if I Tiever got to glory. It must take ’em a 
week,” 

“ Shucks, they don’t aU of ’em preach the same day—only 
one of ’em.” 

“ Well, then, what does the rest of ’em do ? ” 

“ Oh, nothing much. Loll around, pass the plate—and one 
thing or another. But mainly they don’t do nothing.” 

“ Well, then, what are they /or ?” 

“ Why, they’re for style. Don’t you know nothing ? ” 

“ Well, I don’t want to know no such foolishness as that. 
11 ow is servants treated in England ? Do they treat ’em better 
’t we treat our niggers ? ” 

“ No I A servant ain’t nobody there. They treat them 
worse than dogs.” 

“ Don’t they give ’em holidays, the way we do, Christmas 
and New Year’s week, and Fourth of July ? ” 

** Oh, just listen ! A body could tell yow hain’t ever been 
to England by that. Why, Hare-1—why, Joanna, they never 
see a holiday from year’s end to year’s end; never go to the 
circus, nor theatre, nor nigger shows, nor nowheres.” 

“ Nor church ? ” 

“ Nor church.” 

“ But yow always went to church ? ” 



202 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


Well, I was gone up again. I forgot I was the old man's 
servant. But next minute I whirled in on a kind of an explana¬ 
tion how a valley was different from a common servant, and had 
to go to church whether he wanted to or not, and set with the 
family, on account of its being the law. But I didn’t do it 







SEE ASKED HIS PAliDON. 


fi69 


“ None of it at all ? ” 

“ None of it at all. Not a lie in it,” yays I. 

“ Lay yonr hand on this book and say it. 

I see it warn’t nothing but a dictionary, so I laid my hand 
on it and said it. So then she looked a Uttle better satisfied, 
and says: 

«Well, then, I’ll believe some of it; but I hope to gra¬ 
cious if I’ll believe the rest.” 

“What is it you won’t believe, Joe?” says Mary Jane, 
stepping in with Susan behind her. “ It ain’t rignt nor kind 
for you to talk so to him, and him a stranger and so far from 
his people. How would you like to be treated so ? ” 

“ That’s always your way, Maim—always sailing in to help 
somebody before they’re hurt. I hain’t done nothing to him. 
He’s told some stretchers, I reckon ; and I said I wouldn’t 
swallow it all; and that’s every bit and grain I did say. I 
reckon he can stand a little thing like that, can’t he ? ” 

** I don’t care whether it ’twas little or whether ’twas big, 
he’s here in our house and a stranger, and it wasn’t good of 
you to say it. If you was in his place, it would make you feel 
ashamed; and so you oughtn’t to say a thing to another person 
that will make them feel ashamed.” 

“ Why, Maim, he said-” 

“It don’t make no difference what he said —that ain’t 
the thing. .The thing is for you to treat him kind, and not be 
saying things to make him remember he ain’t in bis own 
country and amongst his own folks.” 

I says to myself, this is a girl that I’m letting that ole 
reptle rob her of her money ! 

Then Susan she waltzed in; and if you’ll believe me, she 
did give Hare-Up hark from the tomb! 

Says I to myself, And this is another one that I’m letting 
him rob her of her money I 


I 




K' 





264 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


Then Mary Jane she took another inning, and went in sweet 
and lovely again—which was her way—but when she got done 
there wam’t hardly anything left o’ poor Hare-lip. So she 
hollereA 

“ All right, then,” says the other girls, “ you just ask his 
pardon.” 

She done it, too. And she done it beautiful. She done it 
so beautiful it was good to hear; and I wished I could tell her 
a thousand lies, so she could do it again. 

I says to myself, this is another one that I’m letting him rob 
her of her money. And when she got through, they all jest 
laid themselves out to make me feel at home and know I was 
amongst friends. 1 felt so ornery and low down and mean, that 
I says to myself, My mind’s made up ; I’ll hive that money for 
them or bust. 

So then I lit out—for bed, I said, meaning some time or 
another. When I got by myself, I went to thinking the thing 
over. I says to myself, Shall I go to that doctor, private, and 
blow on these frauds ? No—that won’t do. He might tell 
who told him ; then the king and the duke would make it warm 
for me. Shall I go, private, and tell Mary Jane ? No—I 
dasn’t do it. Her face would give them a hint, sure ; they’ve 
got the money, and they’d slide right out and get away with it. 
If she was to fetch in help. I’d get mixed up in the business, 
before it was done with, 1 judge. No, there ain’t no good way 
but one. I got to steal that money, somehow; and I got to 
steal it some way that they won’t suspicion that I done it 
They’ve got a good thing, here ; and they ain’t agoing to leave 
till they’ve played this family and this town for all they're 
worth, so I’ll find a chance time enough. I’ll steal it, and hide 
it; and by-and-by, when I’m away down the river. I’ll write a 
letter and tell Mary Jane where it’s hid. But I’d better hive 
it to-night, if I can, because the doctor maybe hasn’t let up as 



HlDim IN THE ROOM. 




much as he lets on he has j he might scare them out of here, 

So, thinks I, I’ll go and search them rooms. Upstairs the 
hail was dark, but I found the duke’s room, and started-to paw 
around it with my hands ; but I recollected it wouldn’t be much 
like the king to let anybody else take care of that money but 










If. 


•/fi "yii 


•B. 


















/ 




-V.y 




( n>K 


THE DOKE LOOKS irNDEB THE BED. 


his own self; so then I went to his room and begun to paw 
around there. But I see I couldn’t do nothing without a 
candle, and I dasn’t light one, of course. So I judged I’d got 
to do the other thing—lay for them, and eavesdrop. About 
that time, I hears their footsteps coming, and was going to skip 
under the bed; I reached for it, but it wasn’t where I thought 
it would be ; but I touched the curtain that hid Mary Jane’s 

























2«« TRB adventures OF HUL'KLEDERRY FINN. 


frocks, so I jumped in behind that and snuggled in amongst 
the gowns, and stood there perfectly still. 

They come in and shut the door; and the first thing the 
duke done was to get down and look under the bed. Then I 
was glad I hadn’t found the bed when I wanted it. And yet, 
you know, it’s kind of natural to hide under the bed when you 
are up to anything private. They sets down, then, and the 
king says; 

“ Well, what is it ? and cut it middlin’ short, because it’s 
better for us to be down there a whoopin’-up the mournin’, 
than up here givin’ ’em a chance to talk us over.” 

“Well, this is it, Capet. I ain’t easy ; I ain’t comfortable. 
That doctor lays on my mind. I wanted to know your plans. 
I’ve got a notion, and I think it’s a sound one.” 

“ What is it, duke ? ” 

“That we better glide out of this, before three in the 
morning, and clip it down the river with what we’ve got. 
Specially, seeing we got it so easy— given back to us, flung at 
our heads, as you may say, when of course we allowed to have 
to steal it back. I’m for knocking off and lighting out.” 

That made me feel pretty bad. About an hour or two ago, 
it would a been a little different, but now it made me feel bad 
and disappointed. The king rips out and says: 

“ What! And not sell out the rest o’ the property ? March 
off like a passel o’ fools and leave eight or nine thous’n’ dollars’ 
worth o’ property layin’ around jest sufferin’ to be scooped in? 
—and all good saleable stuff, too.” 

The duke he grumbled; said the bag of gold was enough, 
and he didn’t want to go no deeper—didn’t want to rob a lot of 

orphans of everything they had. 

“ Why, how you talk! ” says the king. “ We shan’t rob ’em 
of nothing at all but jest this money. The people that buys 
the property is the sufferers; because as soon’s it’s found out 



EVCK TAKES THE MOHEY. 


267 


"at we didn’t own it—which won’t be long after we’ve slid—the 
sale won’t be valid, and it’ll all go back to the estate. These- 
jer orphans ’ll git their house back agin, and that’s enough for 
them\ they’re young and spry, and k’n easy earn a livin’. 
Tftey ain’t agoing to suffer. Why, jest think—there’s thous’n’s 
and thous’n’s that ain’t nigh so well off. Bless you, they ain’t 
got noth’n to complain of.” 

“ Well, the king he talked him blind ; so at last he give in, 
and said all right, but said he believed it was blame foolishness 
to stay, and that doctor hanging over them. But the king 
says: 

“ Cuss the doctor 1 What do we k’yer for Aim ? Hain’t we 
got all the fools in town on our side? and ain’t that a big 
enough majority in any town? ” 

So they got ready to go downstairs again. The duke 
says: 

“ I don’t think we put that money in a good place.” 

That cheered me up. I’d begun to think I wam’t going to 
get a hint of no kind to help me. The king says: 

“'S^’hy?” 

“Because Mary Jane ’ll be in mourning from this out; and 

first you know the nigger that does up the rooms will get an 

order to box these duds up and put ’em away; and do you 

reckon a nigger can run across money and not borrow some of 
it?” 

“ Your head’s level agin, duke,” says the king; and he 
come a fumbling under the curtain two or three foot from where 
I TO8. I stuck tight to the wall, and kept mighty still, though 
quivery; and I wondered what them fellows would say to me if 
they catched me; and I tried to think what I’d better do if 
t catch me. But the king he got the bag before I 

CO ^ think more than about a half a thought, and he never 
auspieioned I was around. They took and shoved the bag 



268 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 



half-way downstairs. I groped along up to my cubby, and hid 
it there till I could get a chance to do better. I judged I 
better hide it outside of the house somewheres, because if they 
missed it they would give the house a good ransacking. I 
knowed that very well. Then I turned in, with my clothes all 
on ; but I couldn’t a gone to sleep, if I’d a wanted to, I was in 


through a rip in the straw tick that was under the feather bed, 
and crammed it in a foot or two amongst the straw and said it 
was all right, now, because a nigger only makes up the feather 
bed, and don’t turn over the straw tick only about twice a year, 
and so it wam’t in no danger of getting stole, now. 

But I knowed better. I had it out of there before they was 


UUCK TAKES THE MONEY, 




BUCK TAKES THE MONEY. 


26d 


Buch a sweat to get through with the business. By-and-bj I 
heard the king and the duke come up; so I rolled off of my 
pallet and laid with my chin at the top of my ladder and waited 
to see if anything was going to happen. But nothing did. 

So I held on till all the late sounds had quit and the early 
ones hadn’t begun, yet; and then I slipped down the ladder. 




A CBAOK IN THIS DINING-BOOM DOOB. 

CHAPTER XXVII.

CREPT to their doors 
and listened; they was 
snoring, so I tip-toed 
along, and got down¬ 
stairs all right. There 
warn’t a sound ai^ 
wheres. I peeped 
through a crack of the 
dining-room door, and 
see the men that was 
watching the corpse all 
sound asleep on their 
chairs. The door was 
open into the parlour, 
where the corpse was 
laying, and there was a 
candle in both rooms. 
I passed along, and the 


parlour door was open ; but I see there wam’t nobody in there 
but the remainders of Peter; so I shoved on by ; but the front 
door was locked, and the key wasn’t there. Just then I heard 
somebody coming down the stairs, back behind me. I run 
in the parlour, and took a swift, look around, and the only place 
I see to hide the bag was in the coffin. The lid was shoved along 





TSE FUNERAL. 


271 


about a foot, showing the dead man’s face down in there, with 
a wet cloth over it, and his shroud on. I tucked the money¬ 
bag in under the lid, just down beyond where his hands was 
crossed, which made me creep, they was so cold, and then I 
run back across the room and in behind the door. 

The person coming was Mary Jane. She went to the 
coffin, very soft, and kneeled down and looked in ; then she put 
up her handkerchief and I see she begun to cry, though I 
couldn’t hear her, and her back was to me. I slid out, and as 
I passed the dining-room I thought I’d make sure them watchers 
hadn’t seen me; so I looked through the crack and everything 
was all right. They hadn’t stirred. 

I slipped up to bed, feeling ruther blue, on accounts of the 
thing playing out that way after I had took so much trouble 

run so much resk about it. Says I, if it could stay where 
it is, all right; because when we get down the river a hundred 
mile or two, I could write back to Mary Jane, and she could dig 
him up again and get it; but that ain’t the thing that’s going 
to happen; the thing that’s going to happen is, the money ’ll 
be found when they come to screw on the lid. Then the king 
’ll get it again, and it ’ll be a long day before he gives anybody 
another chance to smouch it from him. Of course I wanted to 
slide down and get it out of there, but I dasn’t try it. Every 
minute it was getting earlier, now, and pretty soon some of them 
watchers would begin to stir, and I might getcatched—catch^^ 
with six thousand dollars in my hands that nobody hadn’t hired 
me to take care of. I don’t wish to be mixed up in no such 
business as that, I says to myself. 

When I got downstairs in the morning the parlour was shut 

up, and the watchers was gone. There wam’t nobody around 

but the family and the widow Bartley and our tribe. I watched 

their faces to see if anything bad been- happening, but I couldn’t 
telL 



272 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


Towards the middle of the day the undertaker come, with 
his man, and they set the coffin in the middle of the room on a 
couple of chairs, and then set all our chairs in rows, and bor¬ 
rowed more from the neighbours till the hall and the parlour 
and the dining-room was full. 1 see the coffin lid was the way 
it was before, but I dasn’t go to look in under it, with folks 
around. 

Then the people begun to flock in, and the beats and the 
girls took seats in the front row at the head of the coffin, and 
for a half an hour the people filed around slow, in single rank, 
and looked down at the dead man’s face a minute, and some 
dropped in a tear, and it was all very still and solemn, only the 
girls and the beats holding handkerchiefs to their eyes and 
keeping their heads bent, and sobbing a little. There warn’t 
no other sound but the scraping of the feet on the floor, and 
blowing noses—because people always blows them more at a 
funeral than they do at other places except church. 

When the place was packed full, the undertaker he slid 
around in his black gloves with his softy soothering ways, put¬ 
ting on the last touches, and getting people and things all 
shipshape and comfortable, and making no more sound than a 
cat. He never spoke; he moved people around, he squeezed 
in late ones, he opened up passage-ways, and done it all with 
nods and signs with his hands. Then he took his place over 
against the wall. He was the softest, glidingest, stealthiest 
man I ever see; and there wam’t no more smile to him than 
there is to a ham. 

They had borrowed a melodeum—a sick one; and when 
everything was ready, a young woman set do\vn and worked it, 
and it was pretty skreeky and colicky, and everybody joined in 
and sung, and Peter was the only one that had a good thing, 
according to my notion. Then the Reverend Hobson opened 
up, slow and solemn, and begun to talk; and straight off the 



THE UNDERTAKER. 


273 


most outrageous row busted out in the cellar a body ever 
hoard; it w'as only one dog, but he made a most powerful 
racket, and he kept it up, right along; the parson he had to 
stand there, over the coffin, and wait—you couldn’t hear your¬ 
self think. It was right down awkward, and nobody didn’t 



THB VMDERTAESK. 


seem to know what to do. But pretty soon they see that long- 
undertaker make a sign to the preacher as much as to 
say, « Dont you worry—just depend on me." Then he stooped 
down and begun to glide along the wall, just his shoulders 
showing over the people’s heads. So he glided along, and the 
pow-wow and racket getUng more and more outrageous aU the 

T 


N. 



274 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


time; and at last, when he had gone around two sides of the 
room, he disappears down cellar. Then, in about’ two seconds 
we heard a whack, and the dog he finished up with a most 
amazing howl or two, and then everything was dead still, 
and the parson begun his solemn talk where he left off. In a 
minute or two here comes this undertaker’s back and shoulders 
gliding along the wall again; and so he glided, and glided, 
around three sides of the room, and then rose up, and shaded 



“ HE HAD A RAT I ’’ 


his mouth with his hands, and stretched his neck out towards 
the preacher, over the people’s heads, and says, in a kind of 
a coarse whisper, “ He had a rat! ” Then he drooped down 
and glided along the wall again to his place. You could see it 
was a great satisfaction to the people, because naturally they 
wanted to know. A little thing like that don’t cost nothing, 
and it’s just the little things that makes a man to be looked up 
to and liked. There wam’t no more popular man in town than 
what that undertaker was. 




SATISFYINQ CURIOSITY. 


276 


Well, the funeral sermon was very good, but pison long and 
tiresome; and then the king he shoved in and got off some of 
his usual rubbage, and at last the job was through, and the 
undertaker begun to sneak up on the coffin with his screw¬ 
driver. I was in a sweat then, and watched him pretty keen. 
But he never meddled at all; just slid the lid along, as soft as 
mush, and screwed it down tight and fast. So there I was! I 
didn’t know whether the money was in there, or not. So, says 
I, s’pose somebody has hogged that bag on the sly ?—now how 
do I know whether to write to Mary Jane or not ? S’pose she 
dug him up and didn’t find nothing—what would she think of 
me ? Blame it, I says, I might get hunted up and jailed ; I’d 
better lay low and keep dark, and not write at all; the thing’s 
awful mixed, now ; trying to better it, I’ve worsened it a hun¬ 
dred times, and I wish to goodness I’d just let it alone, dad 
fetch the whole business! 

They buried him, and we come back home, and I went to 
watching faces again—I couldn’t help it, and I couldn’t rest 
easy. But nothing come of it; the faces didn’t tell me 
nothing. 

The king he visited around, in the evening, and sweetened 
everybody up, and made himself ever so friendly; and he give 
out the idea that his congregation over in England would be in 
a sweat about him, so he must hurry and settle up the estate 
right away, and leave for home. He was very sorry he was so 
pushed, and so was everybody; they wished he could stay 
longer, but they said they could see it couldn’t be done. And he 
said of course him and William would take the girls home with 
them; and that pleased everybody too, because then the girls 
would be well fixed, and amongst their own relations; and it 
pleased the girls, too—tickled them so they clean forgot they 
ever had a trouble in the world; and told him to seU out as 
quick as he wanted to, they would be ready. Them poor things 



276 THE adventures OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


was that glad and happy it made my heart ache to see them 
getting fooled and lied to so, but I didn’t see no safe way for 
me to chip in and change the general tune. 

Well, blamed if the king didn’t bill the house and the 
Diggers and all the property for auction straight off—sale two 
days after the funeral; but anybody could buy private before¬ 
hand if they wanted to. 

So the next day after the funeral, along about noontime, 
the girls* joy got the first jolt; a couple of nigger traders come 
along, and the king sold them the niggers reasonable, for three- 
day drafts as they called it, and away they went, the two sons 
up the river to Memphis, and their mother down the river to 
Orleans. I thought them poor girls and them niggers would 
break their hearts for grief; they cried around each other, and 
took on so it most made me down sick to see it. The girls said 
they hadn’t ever dreamed of seeing the family separated or sold 
away from the town. I can’t ever get it out of my memory, 
the sight of them poor miserable girls and niggers hanging 
around each other’s necks and crying; and I reckon I couldn’t 
a stood it all but would a had to bust out and tell on our 
gang if I hadn’t knowed the sale wam’t no account and the 
oiggers would be back home in a week or two. 

The thing made a big stir in the town, too, and a good 
many come out flat-footed and said it was scandalous to separate 
the mother and the children that way. It injured the frauds 
some; but the old fool he bulled right along, spite of all the 
duke could say or do, and I tell you the duke was powerful 

uneasy. 

Next day was auction day. About broad-day in the morn¬ 
ing, the king and the duke come up in the garret and woke 
me up, and I see by their look that there was trouble. The 

king says: 

« Was you in my room night before last ? ” 



SUSPICIOUS OF BUCK. 


27? 


-No, your majesty ’’-which was the way I always called 

bim when nobody but our gang warn’t around. 

“ Was you in there yisterday er last night? 

“ No, your majesty.” 

Honour bright, now—no lies.” 



“WAS YOO IN MY ^OOMt" 


“ Honour bright, your majesty, I'm telling you the truth. I 
bain’t been anear your room since Miss Mary Jane took you 
and the duke and showed it to you,” 

The duke says: 

** Have you seen anybody else go in there ? ” 


278 THB ADVENTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINR. 

“ No, your grace, not as I remember, I believe.” 

“ Stop and think,” 

I studied a while, and see my chance, then I says: 

“ Well, I see the niggers go in there several times.” 

Both of them give a little jump; and looked like they 
hadn’t ever expected it, and then like they had. Then the duke 
says: 

“ What, aU of them ? ” 

“ No—leastways not all at once. That is, I don’t think I 
ever see them all come out at once but just one time.” 

“ Hello—when was that? ” 

“ It was the day we had the funeral. In the morning. It 
wam’t early, because I overslept. I was just starting down the 
ladder, and I see them.” 

“ Well, go on, go on—what did they do ? How’d they 
act?” 

“They didn’t do nothing. And they didn’t act anyway, 
much, as fur as I see. They tip-toed away; so I seen, easy 
enough, that they’d shoved in there to do up your majesty’s 
room, or something, s’posing you was up; and found you wam'i 
up, and so they was hoping to slide out of the way of trouble 
without waking you up, if they hadn’t already waked you up.” 

“Great guns, this is a go!” says the king; and both of 
them looked pretty sick and tolerable silly. They stood there 
a thinking and scratching their heads a minute, and then the 
duke he bust into a kind of a little raspy chuckle, and says: 

“ It does beat all, how neat the niggers played their hand. 
They let on to be sorry they was going out of this region ! and 
I believed they was sorry. And so did you, and so did every¬ 
body. Don’t ever tell me any more that a nigger ain’t got any 
histrionic talent. Why, the way they played that thing, it 
would fool a/nybody. In my opinion there’s a fortune in ’em. 
If I had capital and a theatre, I wouldn’t want a better lay out 



QUICX SALES AND SMALL PROFITS. 

thiin that—and here we’ve gone and sold ’em for a song. Yes, 
and ain’t privileged to sing the song, yet. Say, where i8 that 
Bong ?—that draft ? ” 

« In the bank for to be collected. Where would it be ? ” 
«Well, that'8 all right then, thank goodness.” 

Says I, kind of timid-like: 

“ Is something gone wrong ? ” 

The king whirls on me and rips out: 

“None o’ your business! You keep your head shet, and 



JAWIKO. 


mind fx own affairs—if you got any. Long as you’re in this 
town, don’t you forgit thaiy you hear ? ” Then he says to the 
• duke: “We got to jest swaller it, and say noth’n : mum's the 
word for us.” 

As they was starting down the ladder, the duke he chuckles 
again, and says: 

“ Quick sal|s and small profits 1 It’s a good business— 
yes.” 

The king snarls around on him and says: 

“ r was trying to do for the best, in sellin’ ’m out so quick. 



TH^ AI>VENtUIiES OE BVCKLEEERRY FINN. 


If the profits has turned out to be none, lackin’ considable, 
and none to carry, is it my fault any more’n its youm? ” 

“ Well, they'd be in this house yet, and we wouldn't if I 
could a got my advice listened to.” 

The king sassed back, as much as was safe for him, and 
then swapped aroxmd and lit into me again. He give me down 
the banks for not coining and telling him I see the niggers 
come out of his room acting that way—said any fool would 
a knowed something was up. And then waltzed in and cussed 
himself a while; and said it all come of him not laying late 
and taking his natural rest that morning, and he’d be blamed 
if he’d ever do it again. So they went off a jawing j and I felt 
dreadful glad I’d worked it all off on to the niggers, and yet 
'^dn’t done the niggers no harm by it. 




CHAPTER XXVIII.




itwas getting-up 
time; so I come down 
the ladder and started 
for downstairs, but as I 
come to the girls’ room, 
the door was open, and 
I see Mary Jane set^ 
ting by her old hair 
trunk, which was open 
and she’d been packing 
things in it—getting 
ready to go to England. 
But she had stopped 
DOW, with a folded gown 
in her lap, and had her 
face in her hands, cry¬ 
ing. I felt awful bad 
to see it; of course 
anybody would. I 
went in there, and says: 


Miss Mary Jane, you can’t abear to see people in trouble, 
and 7 can t^most always. Tell me about it.” 

she done it. And it was the niggers—I just expected 



J82 THJB ADVENTUKRS OF SUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

it. She said the beautiful trip to England was most about 
spoiled for her; she didn’t know how she was ever going to be 
happy there, knowing the mother and the children wam’t ever 
going to see each other no more—and then busted out bitterer 
than ever, and flung up her bands, and says : 

“ Oh, dear, dear, to think they ain’t ever going to see each 
other any more! ” 

“ But they wUX —and inside of two weeks—and I know it I ” 
says I. 

Laws it was out before I could think 1—and before I could 
budge, she throws her arms around my neck, and told me to 
say it againf say it again, say it again! 

I see I had spoke too sudden, and said too much, and was 
in a close place. I asked her to let me think a minute; and 
she set there, very impatient and excited, and handsome, but 
looking kind of happy and eased-up, like a person that’s had a 
tooth pulled out. So I went to studying it out. I says to my¬ 
self, I reckon a body that ups and tells the truth when he is in 
a tight place, is taking considerable many resks, though I ain’t 
had no experience, and can’t say for certain j but it looks so to 
me, anyway ; and yet here’s a case where I’m blest if it don t 
look to me like the truth is better, and actually safer, than a lie. 
I must lay it by in my mind, and think it over some time or 
other, it’s so kind of strange and unregular. I never see nothing 
like it. Well, I says to myself at last. I’m agoing to chance 
it; I’ll up and tell the truth this time, though it does seem 
most like setting down on a kag of powder and touching it off 
just to see where you’ll go to. Then I says: 

“Miss Mary Jane, is there any place out of town a little 
ways, where you could go and stay three or four days ? 

it Yes—Mr. Lothrop’s. Why ? ” 

“ Never mind why, yet. If I’ll tell you how I know the 
niggers will see each other again—inside of two weeks—here in 



“ THE BR UTEI ” 




this house—and prove how I know it—will you go to Mr. 

Lothrop’s and stay four days ? ” 

« Four days ! ” she says; “ I’ll stay a year! ” 

« All right ” I says, “ I don’t want nothing more out of you 
than just your word—I druther have it than another man’s kiss- 



IKDIGKATIOH. 


the-Bible." She smiled, and reddened up very sweet, and I 
says, «If you don’t mind it, I’ll shut the door—and bolt it.” 

Then I come back and set down again, and says: 

“Don’t you holler. Just set still, and take it like a man. 
I got to tell the truth, and you want to brace up, Miss Mary, 
because it’s a bad kind, and going to be hard to take, but 
there ain t no help for it. These uncles of youm ain’t no 



284 THE ABVEETURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


uncles at all—they’re a couple of frauds—regular dead-beats. 

» There, now we’re over the worst of it—^you can stand the rest 
middling easy.” 

It jolted her up like everything, of course ; but I was over 
the shoal water now, so I went right along, her eyes a blazing 
higher and higher all the time, and told her every blame thing, 
from where we first struck that young fool going up to the 
steamboat, clear through to where she flung herself on to the 
king’s breast at the front door, and he kissed her sixteen or 
seventeen times—and then up she jumps, with her face afire 
like sunset, and says: 

“ The brute! Come—don’t waste a minute—not a second 
—we’ll have them tarred and feathered, and flung in the river 1 ” 

Says I • 

“ Cert’nly. But do you mean, before you go to Mr. 
Lothrop’s, or-” 

“ Oh,” she says, “ what am I thinking about! ” she says, 
and set right down again. “ Don’t mind what I said—please 
don’t—you won't, now, will you ? ” Laying her silky hand on 
mine in that kind of a way that I said I would die first. “ I 
never thought, I was so stirred up,” she says; “ now go on, 
and I won’t do so any more. You tell me what to do, and 
whatever you say, I’ll do it.” 

“ Well,” I says, “it’s a rough gang, them two frauds, and 
I’m fixed so I got to travel with them a while longer, whether I 
want to or not—I druther not tell you why—and if you was to 
blow on them this town would get me out of their claws, and Td 
be all right, but there’d be another person that you don’t know 
about who’d be in big trouble. Well, wegot to save him, haint 
we ? Of course. Well, then, we won’t blow on them.” 

Saying them words put a good idea in my head. I see how 
maybe 1 could get me and Jim rid of the frauds; get them 
jailed here, and then leave. But I didn’t want to run the raft 



285 


ROYAL NONESUCR. 

in day-time, without anybody aboard to answer questions but 
me; so I didn’t want the plan to begin working till pretty late . 

to-night. I says: , 

‘‘Jliss Mary Jane, I’ll tell you what we’ll do—and you won t 

have to stay at Mr. Lothrop’s so long, nuther. How fur is it ? ” 

“ A little short of four miles— right out in the country, back 

here.” 

«Well, that’ll answer. Now you go along out there, and 
lay low till nine or half-past, to-night, and then get them to 
fetch you home again—teU them you’ve thought of something. 
If you get here before eleven, put a candle in this window, and 
if I don’t turn up, wait till eleven, and tlien if I don’t turn up 
it means I’m gone, and out of the way, and safe. Then you 
come out and spread the news around, and get these beats 
jailed.” 

“ Good,” she says, “ I’ll do it.” 

“ And if it just happens so that I don’t get away, but get 
took up along with them, you must up and say I told you the 
whole thing beforehand, and you must stand by me all you can.” 

“ Stand by you, indeed I will. They shan’t touch a hair of 
your head I” she says, and I see her nostrils spread and her eyes 
snap when she said it, too. 

“ If I get away, I shan’t be here,” I says, “ to prove these 
rapscallions ain’t your uncles, and I couldn’t do it if I was here. 
I could swear they was beats and bummers, that’s all; though 
that’s worth something. Well, there’s others can do that better 
than what I can—and they’re people that ain’t going to be 
doubted as quick as I’d be. I’ll tell you how to find them. 
Gimme a pencil and a piece of paper. There—‘ Royal Nonesuch^ 

Put it away, and don’t lose it. When the court 
wants to find out something about these two, let them send up 
to Bricksville and say they’ve got the men that played the 
Royal Nonesuch, and ask for some witnesses—^why, you’ll have 



280 TSB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


that entire town down here before you can hardly wink, Miss 
Mary. And they’ll come a-biling, too.” 

I judged we had got everything 6xed about right, now. So 
I says: 

“Just let the auction go right along, and don’t worry. No¬ 
body don’t have to pay for the things they buy till a whole day 
after the auction, on accounts of the short notice, and they ain’t 
going out of this till they get that money—and the way we’ve 
6xed it the sale ain’t going to count, and they ain’t going to 



eow TO FIND THEM. 


get no money. It’s just like the way it was with the niggers— 
it warn’t no sale, and the niggers will be back before long. 
Why, they can’t collect the money for the niggerSy yet —they’re 
in the worst kind of a fix, ]\liss Mary.” 

“ Well,” she says, “ I’ll run down to breakfast now, and then 
I’ll start straight for Mr. Lothrop’s.” 

’Deed, that ain’t the ticket, Miss Mary Jane,” I says, “b^ 
no manner of means; go before breakfast.” 

« Why ? ” 



MAJir JAKE DECIDES TO LEAVE. 


387 


«Wfeat did you reckon I wanted you to go at all for, Mias 
Mary ? ” 

“ Well, I never thought—and come to think, I don’t know, 
was it ? ” 

“ Why, it’s because you ain’t one of these leather-face people. 

I don’t want no better book than what your face is. A body can 
set down and read it off like coarse print. Do you reckon you 
can go and face your uncles, when they come to kiss you 
good-morning, and never-” 

“There, there, don’t! Yes, I’ll go before breakfast—I’ll be 
glad to. And leave my sisters with them ? ” 

“Yes—nevermind about them. They’ve got to stand it 
yet a while. They might suspicion something if all of you was 
to go. I don’t wan’t you to see them, nor your sisters, nor no¬ 
body in this town—if a neighbour was to ask how is your uncles 
this morning, your face would tell something. No, you go right 
along. Miss Mary Jane, and I’ll fix it with all of them. I’ll tell 
Miss Susan to give your love to your uncles and say you’ve 
went away for a few hours for to get a little rest and change, or 
to see a friend, and you’ll be Wk to-night or early in the 
morning.” 

“ G-one to see a friend is all right, but I won’t have my love 
given to them.” 

“ Well, then, it shan’t be.” It was well enough to tell her 
so—no harm in it. It was only a little thing to do, and no 
trouble; and it’s the little things that smoothes people’s roads 
the most, down here below; it would make Mary Jane comfort¬ 
able, and it wouldn’t cost nothing. Then I says : “There’s one 
more thing—that bag of money.” 

“Well, they’ve got that; and it makes me feel pretty silly 
to think how they got it.” 

“ No, you’re out, there. They hain’t got it.” 

“ Why, who’s got it ? ” 



288 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


0 “I wish I knowed, but I don’t. I had it, because I stole it 
from them : and I stole it to give to you; and I know where I 
hid it, but I’m afraid it ain’t there no more. I’m awful sorry. 
Miss Mary Jane, I’m just as sorry as I can be; but I done the 
best I could; I did, honest. I come nigh getting caught, and 
I had to shove it into the first place I come to, and run—and it 
wam’t a good place.” 

“ Oh, stop blaming yourself—it’s too bad to do it, and I won’t 
allow it—you couldn’t help it; it wasn’t you fault. Where did 
you hide it ? ” 

I didn’t want to set her to thinking about her troubles 
again; and I couldn’t seem to get my mouth to tell her what 



HE WROTE. 


would make her see that corpse laying in the coffin with that 
bag of money on his stomach. So for a minute I didn't say 
nothing-”then I says« 

“ I’d ruther not tell you where I put it, Miss Mary Jane, if 
you don’t mind letting me off; but I’ll write it for you on a 
piece of paper, and you can read it along the road to Mr. 
Lothrop’s, if you want to. Do you reckon that’ll do ? ” 

« Oh, yes.” 

So I wrote: “ I if coffin. It was in there when 

vou was crying there, away in the night. I was behind the 
door and I was mighty sorry for you, Miss Mary Jane.” 

It made my eyes water a little, to remember her crying 




289 


BVCK PARTING WITH MARY JANE. 

there aU by herself in the night, and them devils laying thei« 
right under her own roof, shaming her and robbing her; and 
when I folded it up and give it to her, I see the water come 
into her eyes, too; and she shook me by the hand, hard, and says : 

« Good-bye—I’m going to do everything just as you’ve told 
me; and if I don’t ever see you again I sha’n’t ever forget you, 
and I’ll think of you a many and a many a time, and I’ll pTay 
for you, too! ”—and she was gone. 

Pray for me! I reckoned if she knowed me she’d take a 
Job that was more nearer her size. But I bet she done it, just 
the same—she was just that kind. She had the grit to pray 
for Judus if she took the notion—there wam’t no backdown to 
her, I judge. You may say what you want to, but in my 
opinion she had more sand in her than any girl I ever see; in 
my opinion she was just full of sand. It sounds like flattery, 
but it ain’t no flattery. And when it comes to beauty—and 
goodness too—she lays over them all. I hain’t ever seen her 
since that time that I see her go out of that door; no, I hain’t 
ever seen her since, but I reckon I’ve thought of her a many and 
a many a million times, and of her saying she would pray for 
me; and if ever I’d a thought it would do any good for me to 
pray for Aer, blamed if I wouldn’t a done it or bust. 

Well, Mary Jane she lit out the back way, I reckon; because 

nobody see her go. "^en I struck Susan and the hare-lip, I 
says; 

“ What’s the name of them people over on t’other side of 
the river that you all goes to see sometimes ? ” 

They says: 

« There’s several; but it’s the Proctors, mainly.” 

“ That’s the name,” I says; « I most forgot it. Well, Miss 
Mary Jane she told me to tell you she’s gone over there in a 
dreadful hurry—one of them’s sick,” 

“ Which one ? ” 


V 



200 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“I don^t know; leastways I kinder forget; but I think 
it’s-” 

“ Sakes alive, I hope it ain’t Banner f ” 

“ I’m sorry to say it,” 1 says, “ but Hanner’s the very one.” 
“ My goodness—and she so well only last week I Is she 
took bad ? ” 

“ It ain’t no name for it. They set up with her all night, 



HAMNEB WITH THE UUMP& 


Miss Mary Jane said, and they don’t think she’ll last many 
hours.” 

“ Only think of that, now! What’s the matter with her?” 
I couldn’t think of anything reasonable, right off that way, 

so I says : • 

« Mumps.” 



MUMPS. 


291 


"Mumps your granny I They don’t set up ^vith people 
that’s got the mumps.” 

“ They don’t, don’t they ? You better bet they do with 
these mumps. These mumps is different. It’s a new kind, Miss 
Mary Jane said.” 

“ How’s it a new kind ? ” 

“ Because it’s mixed up with other things.” 

“ MTiat other things ? ” 

“ Well, measles, and whooping-cough, and erysipelas, and 
consumption, and yaller janders, and brain fever, and I don’t 
know what all.” 


“ My land! And they call it the mumps ? ” 

“ That’s what Miss Mary Jane said.” 

“ Well, what in the natioiTdo they call it the nium/ps for ? ” 
“ MTiy, because it is the mumps. That’s what it starts with.” 
" Well, ther’ ain’t no sense in it. A body might stump his 
toe, and take pison, and fall down the well, and break his neck, 
and hust his brains out, and somebody come along and ask 
what killed him, and some numskull up and say, * Why, he 
stumped his toe* Would ther’ be any sense in that? No. 
And ther’ ain’t no sense in this, nuther. Is it ketching? ” 

“ Is it ketching ? Why, how you talk. Is a kari'ow catch- 
^8^ ^ dark ? If you don’t hitch on to one tooth, you’re 

bound to on another, aint you ? And you can’t get away with 
that tooth without fetching the whole harrow along, can you ? 
Well, these kind of mumps is a kind of a harrow, as you may 

say and it ain’t no slouch of a harrow, nuther, you come to 
get it hitched on good.” 

“ Well, it’s awful, 1 think,” says the hare-lip. « I’ll go to 
Uncle Harvey and-•” 

. Oh, yes, I says, “ I Of course I would. I wouldn’t 

lose no time.” 

" Well, why wouldn’t you ? " 



292 THE ADVENTURES OF EUCELEBERRY FINN. 


“ Just look at it a minute, and maybe you can see. Hain’t 
your uncles obleeged to get along home to England as fast as 
they can ? And do you reckon they’d be mean enough to go 
ofif and leave you to go all that journey by yourselves ? Fou 
know they’ll wait for you. So fur, so good. Your uncle 
Harvey’s a preacher, ain’t he ? Very well, then; is a ’preacher 
going to deceive a steamboat clerk ? is he going to deceive 
a ship-clerk? —so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane go 
aboard ? Now you know he ain’t. What 'mil he do, then ? 
Why, he’ll say, ‘ It’s a great pity, but my church matters 
has got to get along the best way they can; for my niece has 
been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum mumps, and 
so it’s my bounden duty to set down here and wait the three 
months it takes to show on her if she’s got it.’ But never mind, 

if you think it’s best to tell your Uncle Harvey-” 

“ Shucks, and stay fooling around here when we could all be 
having good times in England whilst we was waiting to find 
out whether Mary Jane’s got it or not ? Why, you talk like a 
muggins.” 

** Well, anyway, 
hours.” 

“ Listen at that, now. You do beat all, for natural stupid¬ 
ness. Can’t you see that they'd go and tell ? Ther* ain’t no 
way but just to not tell anybody at aU.” 

“ Well, maybe you’re right—yes, I judge you are right.” 

“ But I reckon we ought to tell Uncle Harvey she’s gone 
out a while, anyway, so he won’t be uneasy about her ? ” 

“ Yes, Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that. She 
says, ‘ Tell them to give Uncle Harvey and William my love and 
a kiss, and say I’ve run over the river to see Mr.—Mr.—what is 
the name of that rich family your uncle Peter used to think so 

much of?—I mean the one that-” 

“ WTiy, you must mean the Apthorps, ain’t it ? ” 


maybe you better tell some of the neigh- 



THE OPPOSITION LINE. 


203 


“ Of course; bother them kind of names, a body can’t ever 
seem to remember them, half the time, somehow. Yes, she 
said, say she has run over for to ask the Apthorps to be sure 
and come to the auction and buy this house, because she 



THB AUCTION. 


allowed her uncle Peter would nither they had it than anybody 
else j and she’s going to stick to them till they say the/U come, 
and then, if she ain’t too tired, she’s coming home; and if she 
is, she’ll be home in the morning anyway. She said, don’t say 
nothing about the Proctors, but only about the Apthorps^ 



294 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


—whichll be perfectly true, because she is going there to speak 
about their buying the house; I know it, because she told me 
so, herself.” 

“ All right,” they said, and cleared out to lay for their 
uncles, and give them the love and the kisses, and tell them 
the message. 

Everything was all right now. The girls wouldn’t say 
nothing because they wanted to go to England ; and the king 
and the duke would ruther Mary Jane was off working for the 
auction than around in reach of Doctor Robinson. 1 felt very 
good; I judged I had done it pretty neat—I reckoned Tom 
Sawyer couldn’t a done it no neater himself. Of course he 
would a throwed more style into it, but I can’t do that very 
handy, not being bning up to it. 

Well, they held the auction in the public square, along to¬ 
wards the end of the afternoon, and it strung along and strung 
along, and the old man he was on hand and looking his level 
pisonest, up there longside of the auctioneer, and chipping in a 
little Scripture, now and then, or a little goody-goody saying, 
of some kind, and the duke he was around goo-gooing for sym¬ 
pathy all he knowed how, and just spreading himself generly. 

But by-and-by the thing dragged through, and everything 
was sold. Everything but a little old trifling lot in the grave¬ 
yard. So they’d got to work tltat off—I never see such a girafft 
as the king was for wanting to swallow everything. Well, 
whilst they was at it, a steamboat landed, and in about two 
minutes up comes a crowd a whooping and yelling and laughing 
and carrying on, and singing out: 

“ Here*8 your opposition line ! here’s your two sets o’ heirs 
to old Peter Wilks—and you pays your money and you takes 
your choice I ” 


CHAPTER XXIX.

'Ihe.'Y WU9 fetching a very 
nice-looking old gen¬ 
tleman along, and a 
nice-looking younger 
one, with his right 
arm in a sling. And 
my souls, how the 
people yelled, and 
laughed, and kept it 
up. But I didn’t see 
no joke about it, and 
I judged it would 
strain the duke and 
the king some to see 
any. I reckoned 
they’d turn pale. But 
no, nary a pale did 
they turn. The duke 

he never let on he 
suspicioned what was up, but just went a goo-gooing around, 

happy and satisfied, like a jug that’s googling out buttermilk ; 

and as for the king, he just gazed and gazed down sorrowful on 

them new-comers like it give him the stomach-ache in his 

very heart to think there could be such frauds and rascals in 


THB TBUB BBOTUBRS. 



296 fSB ADVENTURBS OP UtJCKLEBERRT PINR. 


the world. Oh, he done it admirable. Lots of the principal 
people gethered around the king, to let him see they was on 
his side. That old gentleman that had just come looked all 
puzzled to death. Pretty soon he begun to speak, and I see, 
straight off, he pronounced like an Englishman, not the king’s 
way, though the king’s was pretty good, for an imitation. I 
can’t give the old gent’s words, nor I can’t imitate him; but 
he turned around to the crowd, and says, about like this: 

“ This is a surprise to me which I wasn’t looking for ; and I’ll 
acknowledge, candid and frank, I ain’t very well fixed to meet 
it and answer it; for my brother and me has had misfortunes, 
he’s broke his arm, and our baggage got put off at a town above 
here, last night in the night by a mistake. I am Peter Wilks’s 
brother Harvey, and this is his brother William, which can’t 
hear nor speak—and can’t even make signs to amount to much, 
now’t he’s only got one hand to work them with. We are who 
we say we are ; and in a day or two, when I get the baggage, I 
can prove it. But, up till then, I won’t say nothing more, but 
go to the hotel and wait.” 

So him and the new dummy started off ; and the king he 
laughs, and blethers out: 

“ Broke his arm— 'very likely ainH it ?—and very convenient, 
too, for a fraud that’s got to make signs, and hain’t learnt how. 
Lost their baggage! That’s mighty good !—and mighty in¬ 
genious—under the circumstances ! ” 

So he laughed again; and so did everybody else, except three 
or four, or maybe half a dozen. One of these was that doctor; 
another one was a sharp-looking gentleman, with a carpet-bag 
of the old-fashioned kind made out of carpet-stuff, that had just 
come off of the steamboat and was talking to him in a low voice, 
and glancing towards the king now and then and nodding their 
heads—it was Levi Bell, the lawyer that was gone up to Louis¬ 
ville ; and another one was a big rough husky that come along 



CONTESTED RELATIONSHIP. 



and listened to all the old gentleman said, and was listening to 
the king now. And when the king got done, this husky up 
and says: 

“ Say, looky here; if you are Harvey Wilks, when’d you 
come to this town ? ” 

“ The day before the funeral, friend,” says the king. 

“ But what time o’ day ? ” 

“ In the evenin’—’bout an hour er two before sundown.” 


^^Bow'd you come ? ” 

“ I come down on the Susan PotveU, from Cincinnati.” 
“Well, then, bow’d you come to be up at the Pint in the 
momin '—in a canoe ? ” 

“ I wam’t up at the Pint in the morniu’.” 

“ It’s a he.” 


Several of them jumped for him and begged him not to talk 
that way to an old man and a preacher. 

“Preacher be hanged, he’s a fraud and a liar. He was up 
at the Pint that momin’. I live up there, don’t I ? Well, T 
was up there, and he was up there. I see him there. He 
come in a canoe, along with Tim Collins and a boy.” 

The doctor he up and says: 

“Would you know the boy again if you was to see him, 
Hines ? ” 

“ I reckon I would, but I don’t know. Why, yonder he is, 
DOW. I know him perfectly easy.” 

It was me he pointed at. The doctor says ; 

Neighbours, I don’t know whether the new couple is frauds 
or not; but if these two ain’t frauds, I am an idiot, that’s all, 
I think its our duty to see that they don’t get away from here 
till we ve looked into this thing. Come along Hines; come 
along, the rest of you. We’ll take these fellows to the tavern 
and affront them with t’other couple, and I reckon we’ll find 
out eometking before we get through.” 



298 TKE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 


It was nuts for the crowd, though maybe not for the king’i 
friends; so we all started. It was about sundown. The 
doctor he led me along by the hand, and was plenty kind 
enough, but he never let go my hand. 

We all got in a big room in the hotel, and lit up some 



THE DOCTOR LEADS HOCK. 


candles, and fetched in the new couple. First, the doctor 
says: 

“ I don’t wish to be too hard on these two men, but I think 
they’re frauds, and they may have ’complices that don’t 
know nothing about. If they have, won’t the ’complices get 



THE KINO EXPLAINS THE LOSS. 


299 


away with that bag of gold Peter Wilks left ? It ain’t unlikely. 
If these men ain’t frauds, they won’t object to sending for that 
money and letting us keep it till they prove they're all right— 
ain’t that so ? ” 

Everybody agreed to that. So I judged they bad our gang 
in a pretty tight place, right at the outstart. But the king he 
only looked sorrowful, and says: 

“ Gentlemen, I wish the money was there, for I ain’t got 
no disposition to throw anything in the way of a fair, open, 
out»and-out investigation o’ this misable business; but alas! 
the money ain’t there; you k’n send and see, if you want to.” 

“ Where is it, then ? ” 

“ Well, when my niece give it to me to keep for her, I took 
and hid it inside o’ the straw tick o’ my bed, not wishin’ to bank 
it for the few days we’d be here, and considerin’ the bed a 
safe place, we not bein’ used to niggers, and suppos'n’ ’em 
honest, like servants in England. The niggers stole it the very 
next mornin’ after I had went downstairs; and when I sold 
em I hadnt missed the money yit, so they got clean away with 
it. My servant here k’n tell you ’bout it, gentlemen.” 

The doctor and several said “ Shucks ! ” and I see nobody 

didn t altogether believe him. One man asked me if I see the 

niggers steal it. I said “ no,” but I see them sneaking out of the 

room and hustling away, and I never thought nothing, only I 

reckoned they was afraid they had waked up my master and was 

trying to get away before he made trouble with‘them. That 

was all they asked me. Then the doctor whirls on me and 
says: 

“ Are you English too ? ” 

« ^ some others laughed, and said, 

W^ then they sailed in on the general investigation, and 
there we had it, up and down, hour in, hour out, and nobody 



300 THE ABVEUTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

never said a word about supper, nor ever seemed to think about 
it—and so they kept it up, and kept it up; and it was the 
worst mixed-up thing you ever see. They made the king tell 
his yarn, and they made the old gentleman tell his*n; and 
anybody but a lot of prejudiced chuckleheads would a seen that 
the old gentleman was spinning truth and t’other one lies. 
And by-and-by they had me up to tell what I knowed. The 
king he give me a left-handed look out of the comer of his eye, 
and so I knowed enough to talk on the right side. I begun to 
tell about Sheffield, and how we lived there, and all about the 
English Wilkses, and so on ; but I didn’t get pretty fur till the 
doctor begun to laugh; and Levi Bell, the lawyer, says; 

“ Set down, my boy, I wouldn’t strain myself, if I was you. 
I reckon you ain’t used to lying, it don’t seem to come handy; 
what you want is practice. You do it pretty awkward.” 

I didn’t care nothing for the compliment, but I was glad to 
be let off, anyway. 

The doctor he started to say something, and turns and 
says: 

** If you’d been in town at first, Levi Bell-” 

The king broke iti and reached out his hand, and says: 

“ Why, is this my poor dead brother’s old friend that he’s 
wrote so often about ? ” 

The lawyer and him shook hands, and the lawyer smiled 
and looked pleased, and they talked right along a while, and 
then got to one side and talked low; and at last the lawyer 
speaks up and says: 

“ That’ll fix it. I’ll take the order and send it, along with 
your brother’s, and then they’ll know it’s all right.” 

So they got some paper and a pen, and the king he set 
down and twisted his head to one side, and chawed his tongue, 
%nd scrawled off something; and then they give the pen to the 
i)uke—and then for the first time, the duke looked sick. But 



A QUESTION OF HANDWRITING. oOl 

he took the pen and wrote. So then the lawyer turns to the 
new old gentleman and says: 

** You and your brother please write a line or two and sign 
your names.” 

Tho old gentleman wrote, but nobody couldn’t read it. The 
lawyer looked powerful astonished, and says: 

“ Well, it beats me ”—and snaked a lot of old letters out of 
his pocket, and examined them, and then examined the old 
man’s writing, and then them again; and then says: “ These 



THE DUKE WnOTE. 


old letters is from Harvey Wilks; and here’s these two’s hand¬ 
writings, and anybody can see they didn’t write them” (the 
king and the duke looked sold and foolish, I tell you, to see 
how the lawyer had took them in), “ and here’s this old gentle¬ 
man’s handwriting, and anybody can tell, easy enough, he didn’t 
write them—fact is, the scratches he makes ain’t properly 

wnivng at all. Now here’s some letters from-” 

The new old gentleman says ? ^ 

“ If yon please, let me explain. Nobody can read my hand 



302 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN 

but my brother there—so he copies for me. It’s hia hand you’v« 
got there, not mine.” 

“ Well! ” says the lawyer, “ this is a state of things. I’ve 
got some of William’s letters too; so if you’ll get him to write 
a line or so we can com-” 

“ He can*t write with his left hand,” says the old gentleman. 
“ If he could use his right hand, you would see that he wrote his 
own letters and mine too. Look at both, please—they’re by 
the same hand.” 

The lawyer done it, and says: 

“ I believe it’s so—and if it ain’t so, there’s a heap stronger 
resemblance than I’d noticed before, anyway. Well, well, well! 
I thought we was right on the track of a slution, but it’s gone 
to grass, partly. But anyway, one thing is proved— these two 
ain’t either of ’em Wilkses ”—and he wagged his head towards 
the king and the duke. 

Well, what do you think?—that muleheaded old fool 
wouldn’t give in then t Indeed he wouldn’t. Said it wam’t 
no fair test. Said his brother William was the cussedest joker 
in the world, and hadn’t tHed to write— he see William was 
going to play one of his jokes the minute he put the pen to 
paper. And so he warmed up and went warbling and warbling 
right along, till he was actually beginning to believe what he 
was saying, himself —but pretty soon the new old gentleman^ 
broke in, and says : 

“ I’ve thought of something. Is there anybody here that 
helped to lay out my br—helped to lay out the late Peter Wilks 
for burying? ” 

“ Yes,” says somebody, “ me and Ab Turner done it. We’re 
both here.” 

Then the old man turns tovrards the king, and says: 

Periaps this gentleman can tell me what was tattooed on 

his bre^t ? " 



TATTOOING. 


803 


Blamed if the king didn’t have to brace up mighty quick, 
or he’d a squshed down like a bluff bank that tlie river has cut 
under, it took him so sudden—and mind you, it was a thing 
that was calculated to make most anybody sqush to get fetched 
such a solid one as that without any notice—becatise how was 
he going to know what was tattooed on the man ? He whitened 
a little; he couldn’t help it; and it was mighty still in there, 
and everybody bending a little forwards and gazing at him. 
Says I to myself, Now he’ll throw up the sponge—there ain’t 
no more use. Well, did he? A body can’t hardly believe it, but 
he didn’t, I reckon he thought he’d keep the thing up till he 
tired them people out, so they’d thin out, and him and the 
duke could break loose and get away. Anyway, he set there, 
and pretty soon he begun to smile, and says: 

“ llf! It’s a very tough question, ain't it! YeSy sir, I k’n 
tell you what’s tattooed on his breast. It’s jest a small, thin, 
blue arrow-that’s what it is ; and if you don’t look dost, you 
can’t see it. Now what do you say_hey ? ” 

Well I never see anything Uke that old blister for clean 
out-and-out cheek. 


The new old gentleman turns brisk towards Ab Turner and 

his p^d, ^d his eye lights up Hke he judged he had got the 
King t/116 timej and says: 

such 

mark on Peter Wilks’s breast ? ” ^ 

Both of them spoke up and says: 

“ We didn’t see no such mark.” 

see 'In “hf' I ‘T gentleman. “ Now, what you did 

nM^h^H . T “ B (which ia an 

betwee tl, y“™g). and a W, with dashes 

between them, so : P-B-W --and he marked them that way 

tint what you .saw ? » " 

Both of them spoke up again, and says ; 


t 



804 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCELEBERTtY FINN. 


“ No, we didn't. We never seen any marks at all.” 

Well, everybody was in a state of mind now; and they sings 
out j, 

“ The whole hilin' of’m *s frauds! Le’s duck ’em ! le’s drown 
’em I le’s ride ’em on a rail! ” and everybody .was whooping at 



« OENTIiEiraN— OBNTLEilEN." 


once, and there was a rattling pow-wow. But the lawyer he 
jumps on the table and yells, and says: 

“G-entlemen—gentlemen/ Hear me just a word—just a 
Bimgle word— if you please! There’s one way yet^-let’s go 
and dig up the corpse and look. 

That took them. 



DlGGiyO Ur THE GOnrSE. 


806 


“ Hooray ! ” they all shouted, and was starting right ofl ; 
but the lawyer and the doctor sung out; 

“ Hold on, hold on ! Collar all these four men and the boy, 
and fetch them along, too ! ” 

“We’ll do it!” they all shouted: “and if we don’t find 
them marks we’ll lynch the whole gang ! ” 

I was scared, now, I tell you. But there wam’t no getting 
away, you know. They gripped us all, and marched us right 
along, straight for the graveyard, which was a mile and a half 
down the river, and the whole town at our heels, for we made 
noise enough, and it was only nine in the evening. 

As we went by our house I wished I hadn’t sent Mary Jane 
out of town; because now if I could tip her the wink, she’d 
light out and save me, and blow on our dead*beats. 

Well, we swarmed along down the river road, just carrying 
on like wild-cats; and to make it more scary, the sky was 
daiking up, and the lightning beginning to wink and Hitter, 
and the wind to shiver amongst the leaves. This was the most 
awful trouble and most dangersome I ever was in ; and I was 
kinder stunned ; everything was going so different from whal 
I had allowed for; stead of being fized so I could take my own 
time, if I wanted to, and see all the fun, and have Mary Jane 
at my back to save me and set me free when the close-fit 
come, here^ was nothing in the world betwixt me and sudden 
death but just them tattoo-marks. If they didn't find them— 

I couldn’t bear to think about it; and yet, somehow, I 
couldn t think about nothing else. It got darker and darker, 
and It was a beautiful time to give the crowd the slip; but that 
big husky had me by the wrist—Hines—and a body might as 
well try to give Holiar the sUp. He dragged me right along, 
he was so excited ; and I had to run to keep up. 

^SHien they got there they swarmed into the graveyard and 
washed over it like an overflow. And when they got to the 


306 TH£! ADVENfURJiS OF BVCKLERERRY FINB. 


grave, they found they had about a hundred times as many 
shovels as they wanted, but nobody hadn’t thought to fetch a 
lantern. But they sailed into digging, anyway, by the flicker 
of the lightning, and sent a man to the nearest house a half a 
mile oflf, to borrow one. 

So they dug and dug, like everything; and it got awful 
dark, and the rain started, and the wind swished and swushed 
along, and the lightning come brisker and brisker, and the 
thunder boomed; but them people never took no notice of it, 
they was so full of this business; and one minute you could 
see everything and every face in that big crowd, and the 
shovelfuls of dirt sailing up out of the grave, and the next 
second the dark wiped it all out, and you couldn’t see nothing 
at all. 

At last they got out the coflBn, and begun to unscrew the 
lid, and then such another crowding, and shouldering, and 
shoving as there was, to scrouge in and get a sight, you never 
see ; and in the dark, that way, it was awful. Hines he hurt 
my wrist dreadful, pulling and tugging so, and I reckon he 
clean forgot I was in the world, he was so excited and panting. 

All of a sudden the lightning let go a perfect sluice of white 
glare, and somebody sings out: 

“ By the living jingo, here’s the bag of gold on his breast! ” 

Hines let out a whoop, like everybody else, and dropped my 
wrist and give a big surge to bust his way in and get a look, 
and the way I lit out and shinned for the road in the dark, 
there ain’t nobody can tell. 

I had the road all to myself, and I fairly flew—leastways I 
had it all to myself except the solid dark, and the now-and-then 
glares, and the buzzing of the rain, and the thrashing of the 
wind, and the splitting of the thunder; and sure as you are 
bom I did clip it along ! 

When I struck the town, I see there warn’t nobody out in 



KUCK ESCAPES. 


80? 


the storm, so I never hunted for no back streets, but humped 
it straight through the main one; and when I begun to get 
towards our house I aimed my eye and set it. No light there ; 
the house all dark—which made me feel sorry and disappointed, 
I didn’t know why. But at last, just as I was sailing hy^ flash 
comes the light in Mary Jane’s window! and my heai*t swelled 
up sudden, like to bust; and the same second the house and 
all was behind me in the dark, and wasn’t ever going to be 
before me no more in this world. She was the best girl I ever 
see, and had the most sand. 

The minute I was far enough above the town to see I could 
make the tow-head, I begun to look sharp for a boat to borrow; 
and the first time the lightning showed me one that wasn’t 
chained, I snatched it and shoved. It was a canoe, and warn’t 
fastened with nothing but a rope. The tow-head was a rattling 
big distance off, away out there in the middle of the river, but 
I didn’t lose no time; and when I struck the raft at last, I 
was so fagged I would a j ust laid down to blow and gasp if I 
could afforded it. But I didn’t. As I sprung aboai'd I sung out: 

“ Out with you, Jim, and set her loose I Glory be to good¬ 
ness, we’re shut of them 

Jim lit out, and was a coming for me with both arms spread, 
he was so full of joy; but when I gUmpsed him in the light¬ 
ning, my heart shot up in my mouth, and I went overboard 
backwards; for I forgot he was old King Lear and a drownded 
A-rab aH,in one, and it most scared the livers and lights out of 
me. But Jim fished me out, and was going to hug me and 
bless me, and so on, he was so glad I was back and we was shut 
of the king and the duke, but I says: 

“Not now—have it for breakfast, have it for breakfast: 
Cut loose and let her slide I ** 

So, in two seconds, away we went, a sliding down the 
nver, and it did seem so good to be free again and all by onr- 

X % 


308 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIRN. 


selves on tbe big river and nobody to bother us. I had to skip 
around a bit, and jump up and crack my heels a few times, I 
couldn’t help it; but about the third ci*ack I noticed a sound 
that I knowed mighty well—and held my breath and listened 
and waited—and sure enough, when the next flash busted out 



LET OUT.” 


over the water, here they come!—and just a laying to their 
oars and making their skiff hum! It was the king and the 

luke. 

So I wilted right down on to the planks, then, and give up; 
»nd it was all I could do to keep from crying. 








eT 

CHAPTER XXX.




shook me by the col¬ 
lar, and says: 

Tryin’ to give us 
the slip, was ye, you 
Tired of our 


company—hey ? ” 

I says: 

“No, your majes¬ 
ty, we wam’t —please 
don’t, your majesty! ” 

“ Quick, then, and 
tell us what was youi 
idea, or I’ll shake the 
insides out o’ you ! 

“ Honest, I’ll tell 
you everything, just as 
it happened, your ma¬ 
jesty, The man that had aholt of me was very good to me, 
and kept saying he had a boy about as big as me that died last 
year, and he was sorry to see a boy in such a dangerous fix ; 
and when they was all took by surprise by finding the- gold, 
and made a rush for the coffin, he lets go of me and whispers. 


THE KING SnAKES HOOK 


SIO THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLERERRY FINN. 


‘ Heel it, now, or they’ll hang ye, sure! ’ and I lit out. It 
didn’t seem no good for me to stay—/ couldn’t do nothing, and 
I didn t want to be hung if I could get away. So I never 
stopped running till I found the canoe ; and when I got here 
I told Jim to hurry, or they’d catch me and hang me yet, and 
said I was afeard you and the duke wasn’t alive, now, and I 
was awful sorry, and so was Jim, and was awful glad when we 
see you coming, you may ask Jim if I didn’t.” 

Jim said it was so; and the king told him to shut up, 
and said, “Oh, yes, it’s mighty likely!” and shook me up 
again, and said he reckoned he’d drownd me. But the duke 
says: 

a done any 

different ? Did you inquire around for Aim, when you got 
loose ? I don’t remember it.” 

So the king let go of me, and begun to cuss that town and 
everybody in it. But the duke says : 

“ You better a blame sight give youreelf a good cussing, 
for you’re the one that’s entitled to it most. You hain’t done 
a thing, from the start, that had any sense in it, except coming 
out so cool and cheeky with that imaginary blue-arrow mark. 
That was bright—it was right down bully; and it was the thing 
that saved us. For if it hadn’t been for that, they’d a jailed us 
till them Englishmen s baggage come—and then—the peniten¬ 
tiary, you bet! But that trick took ’em to the graveyard, and 
the gold done us a still bigger kindness; for if the excited fools 
hadn’t let go all holts and made that rush to get a look, we’d a 
slept in our cravats to-night—cravats warranted to wear^ too— 
longer than we'd need ’em.” 

They was still a minute—thinking—then the king says, 
kind of absent-minded like: 

“ Mf! And we reckoned the niggers stole it I ** 

That made me squirm I 




A ROYAL ROW. 


811 


“ Yes,” says tlie duke, kinder slow, and deliberate, and sar¬ 
castic, “ We did.” 

After about a half a minute, the king drawls out: 

“ Leastways—7 did.” 

The duke says, the same way: 

“ On the contrary— I did.” 

The king kind of ruffles up, and says : 

“ Looky here, Bilgewater, what’r you referrin’ to ? ” 

The duke says, pretty brisk: 

“ WTien it comes to that, maybe you’ll let me ask, what was 
you referring to ? ” 

“ Shucks! ” says the king, very sarcastic; ** but 1 don’t know 
—maybe you was asleep, and didn’t know what you was 
about,” 

The duke bristles right up now, and says : 

“ Oh, let up on this cussed nonsense—do you take me for a 
blame’ fool ? Don’t you reckon I know who hid that money in 
that coffin ? ” 

“ YeSf sir I I know you do know—because you done it 
yourself! ” 

It’s a lie! ”—and the duke went for him. The king sings 

out: 

“Take y’r hands offl—leggo my throat!—I take it all 
back! ” 

The duke says; 

“ lA' ell, you just own up, first, that you dwihide that money 
there, intending to give me the slip one of these days, and come 
back and dig it up, and have it all to yourself.” 

“Wait jest a minute, duke—answer me this one question, 
honest and fair; if you didn’t put the money there, say it, and 
I’ll b’lieve you, and take back everything I said.” 

“You old scoundrel, I didn’t, and you know I didn’t. There, 
now!” 


512 TRE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

“Well, then, I blieve you. But answer me only jest this 
one more now don t git mad ; didn’t you have it in your wAnd 
to hook the money and hide it ? ” 

The duke never said nothing' for a little bit; then he says : 

** W^ell—I don’t care if I didy I didn’t do it anyway* But 
you not only had it in mind to do it, but you done it.” 

“I wisht I may never die if I done it, duke, and that’s 
honest. I won’t say I wara’t goin* to do it, because I was; 
but you—I mean somebody—got in ahead o’ me.” 



THE DUKE WENT FOK HIM. 


“It’s a lie ! You done it, and you got to say you done it, 
or-” 

The king begun to gurgle, and then he gasps out: 

“ ’Nough !—I own up ! ” 

I was very glad to hear him say that, it made me feel much 
more easier than what I was feeling before. So the duke took 
his hands off, and says: 

“ If you ever deny it again, I’ll drown you. It’s well for 




POWERFUL MELLOW. 


813 


you to set there and blubber like a baby—it’s fitten for you. 
after the way you’ve acted. I never see such an old ostrich for 
wanting to gobble everything—and I a trusting you all the time, 
like you was my ovm hither. You ought to been ashamed of 
yourself to stand by and hear it saddled on to a lot of poor 
niggers and you never say a word for ’em. It makes me feel 
ridiculous to think I was soft enough to believe that rubbage. 
Cuss you, I can see, now, why you w'as so anxious to make up 
the detfesit—you wanted to get what money I’d got out of the 
Nonesuch, and one thing or another, and scoop it all!'' 

The king says, timid, and still a snuffling : 

“ Why, duke, it was you that said make up the deffersit, it 
warn’t me.” 

“ Dry up! I don’t want to hear no more out of you 1 ” says 
the duke, “ And now you see what you got by it. They’ve 
got all their own money back, and all of but a shekel or 
two, hes-ldes. G’long to bed—and don’t you deffersit me no 
more deffersits, long’s you live ! ” 

So the king sneaked into the wigwam, and took to his bottle 
for comfort; and before long the duke tackled his bottle ; and 
so in about a half an hour they was as thick as thieves again, 
and the tighter they got, the lovinger they got; and went off 
^ a snoring m each other’s arms. They both got powerful mellow, 
but I noticed the king didn’t get mellow enough to forget to 
remember to not deny about hiding the money-bag again. That 
made me feel easy and satisfied. Of course when they got to 
snoring, we had a long gabble, and I told Jim everything 


CHAPTER XXXI.
.r. 




M^j^i 

Hlfirin^li 


•-: / 

I 

'/•■ 4iW ^ ’' 

8PANT3H M0S9. 

of danger, and they begun to work the villages again. 

First they done a lecture on temperance; but they didnt 
make enough for them both to get drunk on. Then in anothei 
village they started a dancing school; but they didn’t know no 
more how to dance than a kangaroo does; so the first prance 
they made, the general public jumped in and pranced them out 


^'lasn’t stop again at any 
town, for days and days; 
kept right along down 
the river. We was 
down south in the warm 
weather, now, and a 
mighty long ways from 
home. We begun to 
come to trees with 
Spanish moss on them, 
hanging down from the 
limbs like long gray 
beards. It was the first 
I ever see it growing, 
and it made the woods 
look solemn and dismal. 
So now the frauds 
reckoned they was out 



OMINOUS PLANS. 


315 


of town. Another time they tried a go atyellocuf ion ; but they 
didn't yellocute long till the audience got up and give them a 
solid good cussing and made them skip out. They tackled 
missionarying, and mesmerisering, and doctoring, and telling 
fortunes, and a little of everything; but they couldn’t seem to 
have no luck. So at last they got just about dead broke, and 
laid around the raft, as she floated along, thinking, and thinking, 
and never saying nothing, by the half a day at a time, and 
dreadful blue and desperate. 

And at last they took a change, and begun to lay their heads 
together in the wigwam and talk low and confidential two or 
three hoiu-s at a time. Jim and me got uneasy. We didn’t 
like the look of it. We judged they was studying up some 
kind of worse deviltry than ever. We turned it over and over, 
and at last we made up our minds they was going to break into 
somebody’s house or store, or was going into the counterfeit- 
money business, or something. So then we was pretty scared, 
and made up an agreement that we wouldn’t have nothing in 
the world to do with stich actions, and if we ever got the least 
show we would give them the cold shake, and clear out and 
leave them behind. Well, early one morning we hid the raft 
in a good safe place about two mile below a little bit of a shabby 
village, named Pikesville, and the king he went ashore, and 
told U8 all to stay hid whilst he went up to town and smelt 
around to see if anybody had got any wind of the Royal None¬ 
such there yet. (“ House to rob, you mcaw,” says I to myself; 

and when you get through robbing it you’ll come back here an d 
wonder what’s become of me and Jim and the raft—and you’ll 
have to take it out in wondering.”) And he said if he wam’t 

ac by midday, the duke and me would know it was all right, 
and we was to come along. 

So we staid where we was. The duke he fretted and sweated 
wotm , and was in a mighty sour way. He scolded us for every- 


316 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

thiDg, and we couldn’t seem to do nothing right; he found 
fault with every little thing. Something was a-brewing sure. 
I was good and glad when midday come and no king j we could 
have a change, anyway—and maybe a chance for the change, 
on top of it. So me and the duke went up to the village, and 
hunted around there for the king, and by-and-by we found him 
in the back room of a little low doggery, very tight, and a lot 
of loafers bullyragging him for sport, and he a cussing and 
threatening with all his might, and so tight he couldn’t walk, 
and couldn’t do nothing to them. The duke he begun to abuse 
him for an old fool, and the king begun to sass back; and the 
minute they was fairly at it, I lit out, and shook the reefs out 
of my hind legs, and spun down the river road like a deer—for 
I see our chance ; and I made up my mind that it would be a 
long day before they ever see me and Jim again. I got down 
there all out of breath but loaded up with joy, and sung out— 

“ Set her loose, Jim, we’re all right, now 1 ” 

But there wam’t no answer, and nob<idy come out of the 
wigwam. Jim was gone! I set up a shout—and then another 
—and then another one; and run this way and that in the 
woods, whooping and screeching; but it warn’tnouse—old Jim 
was gone. Then I set down and cried; I couldn’t help it. But 
I couldn’t set still long. Pretty soon I went out on the road, 
trying to think what I better do, and I run across a boy 
walking, and asked him if he’d seen a strange nigger, dressed 
so and so, and he says : 

“ Yes.” 

“ Wherebouts ? ” says I. 

“ Do\vn to Silas Phelps’ place, two mile below here. He’s 
a runaway nigger, and they’ve got him. Was you looking for 
him?” 

“ You bet I ain’t. I run across him in the woods about an 
hour or two ago, and he said if I hollered he’d cut my livers out 



JIM OONEt 


317 


—and told me to lay down and stay where I w.is; and I done 
it. Been there ever since ; afeard to come out.” 

“ Well,” he says, you needn’t be afeard no more, been/ 
they’ve got him. He run off f’m down South, som’eiB.” 



WHO NAILED HlMf” 


“It’s a good job they got him ” 

Well, I reckon! There’s two hunderd dollars reward on 
It a like picking up money out’n the road.” 

“ Yes, it is—and I could a had it if I’d been big enough; I 
«ee him first. Who nailed him ? ” 


318 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ It was an old fellow—a stranger—and he sold out hifc 
chance in him for forty dollars, becuz he’s got to go up the river 
and can’t wait. Think o’ that, now I You bet Vd wait, if it 
was seven year.” 

“ That’s me, every time,” says I. “ But maybe his chance 
ain’t worth no more than that, if he’ll sell it so cheap. Maybe 
there’s something ain’t straight about it.” 

“ Bat it isy though—straight as a string. I see the hand¬ 
bill myself. It tells all about him, to a dot—paints him like a 
picture, and tells the plantation he’s frum, below NewrZeans. 
No-sirree-6o6, they ain’t no trouble ’bout that speculation, you 
bet you. Say, gimme a chaw tobacker, won’t ye? ” 

I didn’t have none, so he left. I went to the raft, and set 
down in the wigwam to think. But I couldn’t come to nothing. 
I thought till I wore my head sore, but I couldn’t see no way 
out of the trouble. After all this long journey, and after all 
we’d done for them scoundrels, here was it all come to nothing, 
everything all busted up and ruined, because they could have 
tbe heart to serve Jim such a trick as that, and make him a 
slave again all his life, and amongst strangers, too, for forty dirty 
dollars. 

Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times better 
for Jim to be a slave at home where his family was, as long as 
he’d got to be a slave, and so I’d better write a letter to Tom 
Sawyer, and tell him to tell Miss Watson where he was. But 
I soon give up that notion, for two things: she’d be mad and 
disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness for leaving her, 
and so she’d sell him straight down the river again; and if she 
didn’t, everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger, and 
they’d make Jim feel it all the time, and so he’d feel ornery 
and disgraced. And then think of me! It would get all 
around that Huck Finn helped a nigger to get his freedom; 
and if I was to ever see anybody from that town again. I’d be 



OLD UECOLLECTIONS. 


319 


ready to get down and lick his boots for shame. That’s just 
the way; a person does a low-down thing, and then he don’t 
want to take no consequences of it. Thinks as long as he can 
hide it, it ain’t no disgrace. That was my fix exactly. The 
more I studied about this, the more my conscience went to 
grinding me, and the more wicked and low-down and ornery I 
got to feeling. And at last, when it hit me all of a sudden 
that here was the plain hand of Providence slapping me in the 
face and letting me know my wickedness was being watched all 
the time from up there in heaven, whilst I was stealing a poor 
old woman’s nigger that hadn’t ever done me no harm, and now 
was showing me there’s One that’s always on the look-out, and 


ain’t agoing to allow no such miserable doings to go only just 
so fur and no further, I most dropped in my tracks I was so 
scared. Well, I tried the best I could to kinder soften it up 
somehow for myself, by saying I was brung up wicked, and so 
I wam’t so much to blame ; but something inside of me kept 
saying, ‘‘ There was the Sunday-school, you could a gone to it; 
and if you’d a done it they’d a learnt you, there, that people that 
acts as I’d been acting about that nigger goes to everlasting fire.” 

It made me shiver. And I about made up my mind to pray ; 
and see if I couldn’t try to quit being the kind of a boy I was, 
and be belter. So I kneeled down. But the words wouldn’t 


wme. Why wouldn’t they? It warn’t no use to try and hide 
it from Him. Nor from 7n«, neither. I knowed very well why 
they wouldn’t come. It was because my heart wam’t right; 
it was because I wam’t square; it was because I was playing 
double. I was letting onto give up sin, but away inside of me 
I was holding on to the biggest one of all. I was trying to 
m^e my mouth say I would do the right thing and the clean 
thing, and go and wnte to that nigger’s owner and tell where he 
; hut deep down in me I knowed it was a lie—and He 
knowed it. You can’t pray a lie—I found that out. 


^ THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


So I was full of trouble, full as I could be ; and didn’t know 
what to do. At last I had an idea; and I says, I’ll go and 
• write the letter—and then see if I can pray. ^Vhy, it was 



THINKING. 


astonishing, the way I felt as light as a feather, right straight 
off, and my troubles all gone. So I got a piece of paper and a 
pencil, all glad and excited, and set down and wrote: 

Miss Watson yoor runaway nigger Jim is down liere two mile below Pikes- 
ville and Mr. Phelps has got him and he will give him up for the reward if 
you send. HuoK Finn. 

I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I 
had ever felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now. 
But I didn’t do it straight off, but laid the paper down and set 



OLD TtnCOLLDCTIONS. 


921 


there thinking—thinking how good it was all this happened so, 
and how near I come to being lost and going to hell. And 
went on thinking. And got to thinking over our trip duvrn 
the river; and I see Jim before me, all the time, in the day, 
and in the night-time, sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms, 
and we a floating along, talking, and singing, and laughing. 
But somehow I couldn’t seem to strike no places to harden me 
against him, but only the other kind. I’d see him standing 
my watch on top of his’n, stead of calling me, so I could go on 
sleeping; and see him how glad he was when I come back out 
of the fog; and when I come to him again in the swamp, up 
there where the feud was; and such-like times; and would 
always call me honey, and pet me, and do everything he could 
think of for me, and how good he always was; and at last I 
struck the time I saved him by telling the men we had small¬ 
pox aboard and he was so grateful, and said I was the besi 
friend old Jim ever had in the world, and the only one he's 
got now; and then I happened to look around, and see that 

PEP6r* 


Z m^h ^ ^ of hold- 

g my breath, and then says to mvself* 

“All right then, ru go to heU»_and tore it up. 

sSTJrdd tat n1 

bein? bruna nn -F j again» which was in my line, 

& g up to It, and the other wam’t. And for a starter 

. r:fd tC ^>aver/aSnVa.rd 

as lOTg as l because 

wht ho^ ' sood. I aright as well go the 


T 


822 THE ABVENTUitES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

Then I set to thinking over how to get at it, and turned 
over considerable many ways in my mind ; and at last fixed up 
a plan that suited me. So then I took the bearings of a woody 
island that was down the river a piece, and as soon as it was 
fairly dark I crept out with my raft and went for it, and hid it 
there, and then turned in. I slept the night through, and got 
up before it was light, and had my breakfast, and put on my 
store clothes, and tied up some others and one thing or another 
in a bundle, and took the canoe and cleared for shore. I landed 
below where I judged was Phelps’ place, and hid my bundle in 
the woods, and then filled up the canoe with water, and loaded 
rocks into her and sunk her where I could find her again when 
I wanted her, about a quarter of a mile below a little steam 

sawmill that was on the bank. 

Then I struck up the road, and when t passed the mill I 
see a sign on it, “ Phelps’ Sawmill,” and when I come to the 
farm-houses, two or three hundred yards further along, I kept 
my eyes peeled, but didn’t see nobody around, though it was 
good daylight, now. But I didn’t mind, because I didn’t want 
to see nobody just yet—I only wanted to get the lay of the 
land. According to my plan, I was going to turn up there 
from the village, not from below. So I just took a look, and 
shoved along, straight for town. Well, the very first man I see, 
when I got there, was the duke. He was sticking up a bill 
for the Royal Nonesuch—three-night performance—like that 
other time. They had the cheek, them frauds ! I was right 
on him, before I could shirk. He looked astonished, and says: 

“ Hel-io / Wher’d you come from ? ” Then he says, kind 
of glad and eager, “Where’s the raft?—got her in a good 

place ? ” 

I says: ^ 

“ Why, that’s just what I was agoing to ask your grace. 

Then he didn’t look so joyful—and says? 



A SHEEP STORY. 


323 


“ What was your idea for asking me ? ” he says. 

“Well,” I says, “when I see the king in that doggery yes¬ 
terday, I says to myself, we can’t get him home for hours, till 
he’s soberer; so I went a loafing around town to put in the 
time, and wait. A man up and offered me ten cents to help 
him pull a skifif over the river and back to fetch a sheep, and 
60 I went along; but when we was dragging him to the boat, 
and the man left me aholt of the rope and went behind him to 
fihove him along, he was too strong for me, and jerked loose 
and run, and we after him. We didn’t have no dog, and so we 
had to chase him all over the country till we tired him out. We 
never got him till dark, then we fetched him over, and I started 
down for the raft. When I got there and see it was gone, 1 
says to myself, * they’ve got into trouble and had to leave ; and 
they’ve took my nigger, which is the only nigger I’ve got in 
the world, and now I’m in a strange country, and ain’t got no 
property no more, nor nothing, and no way to make my living; ’ 
so I set down and cried. I slept in the woods all night. But 
what did become of the raft then?—and Jim, poor Jim ! ” 

“Blamed if I know—that is, what’s become of the raft. 
That old fool had made a trade and got forty dollars, and when 
we found him in the doggery the loafers had matched half 
dollars with him and got every cent but what he’d spent for 
whisky; and when I got him home late last night and found 

the raft gone, we said, < That Uttle rascal has stole our raft and 
shook us, and run oflF down the river.’ ” 


‘I wouldn’t shake my nigger, would I?—the only nigger I 
had in the world, and the only property ” 

“ We never thought of that. Fact is, I reckon we’d come 
to consider him <mr nigger; yes, we did consider him so 
goodness knows we had trouble enough for him. So when 
we see the raft was gone, and we flat broke, there warn’t any- 
thing for It but to try the Royal Nonesuch another shake. And 


824 THE AhVENTUEES OF JIUCKLEBEEEY FINN. 


I’ve pegged along ever since, dry as a powder-horn. Where’s that 
ten cents ? Give it here.” 

I had considerable money, so I give him ten cents, but 
begged him to spend it for something to eat, and give me some, 
because it was all the money I had, and I hadn’t had nothing 



HR GATE HIM TEN CENTS. 


to eat since yesterday. He never said nothing. The next 

minute he whirls on me and says: 

“Do you reckon that nigger would blow on us? Wed 

skin him if he done that! 

“ How can he blow ? Hain’t he run olf ? ” 



VALUABLE INFORMaFION. 


S25 


“No! That old fool sold him, and never divided with me, 
and the money’s gone.” 

“ Sold him ? ” I says, and begun to cry; why, he was 
my nigger, and that was my money. Where is he ?—I want 
my nigger.” 

“ Well, you can’t get your nigger, that’s all—so dry up your 

blubbering. Looky here—do you think you^d venture to blow 
% 

on us ? Blamed if I think I’d trust you. Why, if you was to 
blow on us—” 

He stopped, but I never see the duke look so ugly out of 
his eyes before. I went on a-whimpering, and says: 

“ I don’t want to blow on nobody; and I ain’t got no time 
to blow, nohow. I got to turn out and find my nigger.” 

He looked kinder bothered, and stood there with his bills 
fluttering on his arm, thinking, and wrinkling up his forehead. 
At last he says: 

111 tell you something. We got to be here three days. 
If you’ll promise you won’t blow, and won’t let the nigger blow, 
111 tell you where to find him.” 

So I promised, and he says: 

“A farmer by the name of Silas Ph-” and then he 

stopped. You see he started to tell jne the truth ; but when 
he stopped, that way, and begun to study and think again, I 
reckoned he was changing his mind. And so he was. He 
wouldn’t trust me; he wanted to make sure of having me out 

«rpL ^ whole three days. So pretty soon he says: 

The man that bought him is named Abram Foster—Abram 

. oster—and he lives forty mile back here in the country, on 
the road to Lafayette.” 

« ^1 nght,” I says, «I can walk it in three days. And I’ll 
start this very afternoon,” 

“No you won’t, you’ll start now; and don’t you lose any 
time about it. neither, nor do any gabbling by the way. Just 



326 THE AT)VENTVRES OF HVCKLEBERRY FINN. 


keep a tight tongue in your head and move right along, and 
then you won’t get into trouble with us, d’ye hear ? ” 

That was the order I wanted, and that was the one I played 
for. I wanted to be left free to work my plans. 

‘‘ So clear out,” he says; ** and you can tell Mr. Foster 
whatever you want to. Maybe you can get him to believe that 
Jim is your nigger—some idiots don’t require documents— 



8TBIKINO KOR THE BACK COUNTRV. 

leastways I’ve heard there’s such down South here. And when 
you tell him the handbill and the reward’s bogus, maybe he’ll 
believe you when you explain to him what the idea was for 
getting ’em out. Go ’long, now, and tell him anything you 
want to; but mind you don’t work your jaw any between here 
and there.” 

So I left, and struck for the back country. I didn’t look 
around, but I kinder felt like he was watching me. But I 
knowed I could tire him out at that. I went straight out in 
the country as much as a mile, before I stopped ; then I doubled 




TBIL BACK COVNTKT. 


827 


back through the woods towards Phelps’. I reckoned I better 
start in on my plan straight off, without fooling around, becjxuse 
I wanted to stop Jim’s mouth till these fellows could get away. 
I didn’t want no trouble with their kind. I’d seen all I wanted 
to of them, and wanted to get entirely shut of them. 





CHAPTER XXXII.

I got there it was all 
still and Sunday-like, 
and hot and sunshiny 
—the hands was gone 
to the fields; and there 
was them kind of faint 
dronings of bugs and 
(lies in the air that 
makes it seem so lone¬ 
some and like every¬ 
body’s dead and gone; 
and if a breeze fans along 
and quivers the leaves, 
it makes you feel mourn¬ 
ful, because you feel like 
it’s spirits whispering— 
Hpirits that’s been dead 
ever so many years— 
and you always think they’re talking about you. As a general 
thing it makes a body wish he was dead, too, and done with it all. 

Phelps’was one of these little one-horse cotton plantations; 
and they all look alike. A rail fence round a two-acre yard; 
a stile, made out of logs sawed off and up-ended, in steps, like 


SllUL .,.NU seM)AY-LlKE. 



STILL AND SUNDAY-LIKF. 


829 


barrels of a different length, to climb over the fence with, and 
for the women to stand on when they are going to jump on to a 
horse ; some sickly grass-patches in the big yard, but, mostly it 
was bare and smooth, like an old hat with the nap rubbed off; 
big double log house for the white folks—hewed logs, with the 
chinks stopped up with mud or mortar, and these mud-stripes 
been whitewashed some time or another; round-log kitchen, 
with a big broad, open but roofed passage joining it to the 
house } log smoke-house back of the kitchen ; three little log 
nigger-cabins in a row t’other side the smoke-house ; one little 
hut all by itself away down against the back fence, and some 
outbuildings down a piece the other side; ash-hopper, and big 
kettle to bile soap in, by the little hut; bench by the kitchen 
door, with bucket of water and a gourd ; bound asleep there, in 
the sun; more hounds asleep, round about; about three shade- 
trees away off in a corner ; some curraut bushes and goopeberry 
bushes in one place by the fence; outside of the fence a garden 
and a water-melon patch ; then the cotton fields begins ; and 
after the fields, the woods. 

I went around and dumb over the back stile by the ash- 

hopper, and started for the kitchen. When I got a little ways, 

I heard the dim hum of a spinning-wheel wailing along up and 

sinking along down again; and then I knowed for certain I 

wished I was dead—for that is the lonesomest sound in the 
whole world. 

I went right along, not fixing up any particular plan, but 
just trusting to Providence to put the right words in my mouth 
when the time come; for I’d noticed that Providence always 
did put the right words in my mouth, if I left it alone. 

When I got half-way, first one hound and then another got 

course I stopped and faced them, 
nil ept still. And such another pow-wow as they made! In 
a quarter of a minute I was a kind of a hub of a wheel, as you 



830 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


may say—spokes made out of dogs—circle of fifteen of them 
packed together around me, with their necks and noses stretched 
up towards me, a barking and howling; and more a coming; 
you could see them sailing over fences and around comers from 
everywheres. 

A nigger woman come tearing out of the kichen with a 
rolling-pin in her hand, singing out, “ Begone ! you Tige! you 
Spot! begone, sah! ” and she fetched first one and then another 
of them a clip and sent him howling, and then the rest followed; 
and the next second, half of them come back, wagging their 
tails around me and making friends with me. There ain’t no 
hann in a hound, nohow. 

And behind the woman comes a little nigger girl and two 
little nigger boys, without anything on but tow-hnen shirts 
and they hung on to their mother’s gown, and peeped out fronr. 
behind her at me, bashful, the way they always do. And here 
comes the white woman running from the house, about forty- 
five or fifty year old, bareheaded, and her spinning-stick in her 
band; and behind her comes her little white children, acting 
the same way the little niggers was doing. She was smiling 
all over so she could hardly stand—and says: 

“ It’s you^ at last!— ain't it ? ” 

I out with a “ Yes’m,” before I thought. 

She grabbed me and hugged me tight; and then gripped 
me by both hands and shook and shook; and the tears come 
in her eyes, and run down over ; and she couldn’t seem to hug 
and shake enough, and kept saying, “ You don’t look as much 
like your mother as I reckoned you would, but law sakes, I 
don’t care for that, I’m no glad to see you! Dear, dear, it 
does seem like I could eat you up ! Childem, it’s your Cousin 
Tom !—-tell him howdy.” 

But they ducked their heads, and put their fingers in their 
mouths, and hid behind her. So she run on : 



MISTAKEN IDENTITY. 


831 


“ Lize, hurry up aud get him a hot breakfast, right a^y— 
or did you get your breakfast on the boat ? ” 

I said I had got it on the boat. So then she started for 
the house, leading me by the hand, and the children tagging 
after. When we got there, she set me down in a split-bottomed 
chair, aud set herself down on a little low stool in front of me, 
holding both of my hands, and says: 



6HB HUOOBD HIM TIGHT, 


“ Now I can have a good, look at yon ; and laws-a-me, I’ve 

been hungry for it a many and a many a time, all these long 

years, and rt s come at last! We been eapeoting you a couple 

of dys and more. What’s kep’ you ?-boat get aground ? ” 
“Yes’m—she_*» 



882 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ Don’t say yes’in - say Aunt Sally. Where’d she get 
aground ? ” 

I didn’t rightly know what to say, because I didn’t know 
whether the boat would be coming up the river or down. But 
I gfo a good deal on instinct; and my instinct said she would 
be coming up—from down towards Orleans. That didn’t help 
me much, though; for I didn’t know the names of bars down 
that way. I see I’d got to invent a bar, or forget the name of 
the one we got aground on—or— Now I struck an idea, and 
fetched it out: 

“ It warn’t the grounding—that didn’t keep us back but a 
little. We blowed out a cylinder-head,” 

“ Good gracious! anybody hurt ? ” 

“No’m. Killed a nigger.” 

“ Well, it’s lucky ; because sometimes people do get hurt. 
Two years ago last Christmas, your Uncle Silas was coming up 
from Newrleans on the old Lally Rooh, and she blowed out a 
cylinder-head and crippled a man. And I think he died after¬ 
wards. He was a Babtist. Your Uncle Silas knowed a family 
in Baton Rouge that knowed his people very well. Yes, I re¬ 
member, now he did die. Mortification set in, and they had 
to amputate him. But it didn’t save him. Yes, it was morti¬ 
fication—that was it. He turned blue all over, and died in 
the hope of a glorious resurrection. They say he was a sight 
to look at. Your uncle’s been up to the town every day to fetch 
you. And he’s gone again, not more’n an hour ago: he’ll be 
back any minute, now. You must a met him on the road, 

didn’t you ?—oldish man, with a-” 

“ No, I didn’t see nobody, Aunt Sally. The boat landed 
just at daylight, and I left my baggage on the wharf-boat and 
went looking around the town and out a piece in the country, 
to put in the time and not get here too soon ; and so I come 
down the back way.” 



UP A STUMP. 




you give the baggage to ? ** 

“ Nobody.’ 

« Why, child, it’ll be stole! ” 

“ Not where I hid it I reckon it won’t,” I says. 

“ How’d you get your breakfast so early on the boat ? ” 

It was kinder thin ice, but I says: 

“The captain see me standing around, and told me I bettei 
have something to eat before I went ashore; so he took me in 
the texas to the oflScers’ lunch, and give me all I wanted.” 

I was getting so uneasy I couldn’t listen good. I had my 
mind on the children all the time; I wanted to get them out 
to one side, and pump them a little, and find out who 1 was. 
But I couldn’t get no show, Mrs, Phelps kept it up and run on 
so. Pretty soon she made the cold chills streak all down my 
back, because she says: 

“ But here we’re a running on this way, and yoii hain’t told 
jae a word about Sis, nor any of them. Now I’ll rest my works 
a little, and you start up yourn ; just tell me eve'i'ything —tell 
me all about’m all—every one of’m; and how they are, and 
what they’re doing, and what they told you to tell me; and 
every last thing you can think of.” 

Well, I see I was up a stump—and up it good. Providence 
had stood by me this fur, all right, but I was hard and tight 
aground, now. I see it wara’t a bit of use to try to go ahead 

I d got to throw up my hand. So I says to myself, here's 

another place where I got to resk the truth. I opened my 

mouth to begin; but she grabbed me and hustled me in behind 
the bed, and says: 

Here he comes! stick your head down lower—there, 

thatll do; you can’t be seen, now. Don’t you let on you’re 

here. I’ll play a joke on him. Childern, don’t you say a 
word.” 

I see I was in a fix, now. But it wam’t no use to won^ ; 



334 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


there warn’t nothing to do but just hold still, and try and be 
ready to stand •from under when the lightning struck. 

I had just one little glimpse of the old gentleman when he 
come in, then the bed hid him. Airs, Phelps she jumps'^or 
him and says: 

“ Has he come ? ” 

“ No,” says her husband. 

“ Good-7ies8 gracious ! ” she says, “ what in the world can 
have become of him ? ” 

“I can’t imagine,” says the old gentleman; “and I must 
say, it makes me dreadful uneasy.” 

“Uneasy!” she says, “^’m ready to go distracted! He 
mwsi a come ; and you've missed him along the road. I hiow 
it’s so—something tells me so.” 

“ Why Sally, I couldn't miss him along the road— you 
know that.” 

“ But oh, dear, dear, what will Sis say ! He must a come! 
You must a missed him. He-” 

“ Oh, don’t distress me any more’n I’m already distressed. 
I don’t know what in the world to make of it. I’m at my wit’s 
end, and I don’t mind acknowledging’t I’m right down scared. 
But there’s no hope th.at’s he come ! for he couldn't come and 
me miss him. Sally, it’s terrible—^just terrible—something’s 
happened to the boat, sure! ” 

“Why, Silas! Look yonder!—up the road!—ain’t that 
somebody coming ? ” 

He sprung to the window at the head of the bed, and that 
give Mrs. Phelps the chance she wanted. She stooped down 
quick, at the foot of the bed, and give me a pull, and out I 
come; and when he turned back from the window, there she 
stood, a-beaming and a-smiling like a house afire, and I stand- 
ing pretty meek and sweaty alongside. The old gentleman 

stared, and says; 



IN A DILEMMA. 


SS6 


« Why, who’s that ? ” 

“ Who do you reckon’t is ? ” 

“ I hain’t no idea. Who is it ? ” 

«It’s Tom Sawyer ! ” 

By jings, I most slumped though the floor. But there 



"WHO DO YOU BfiCKON ’T IS?" 


warn t no time to swap knives; the old man grabbed me by the 

hand and shook, and kept on shaking; and all the time, how 

the woman did dance around and laugh and cry; and then how 

they both did Are off questions about Sid, and Mary, and the 
rest of the tribe. 

But if they was joyful, it wam’t nothing to what I was ; for 



a.H« THE ADVENTUTtES OF HUCKLEBEnRV FINE. 


it was like being born again, I was so glad to find out who I 
was. Well, they froze to me for two hours; and at last when 
my chin was so tired it couldn’t hardly go, any more, I had told 
them more about my family—I mean the Sawyer family—than 
ever happened to any six Sawyer families. And I explained all 
about how we blowed out a cylinder-head at the mouth of 
White River and it took us three days to fix it. Which was all 
right, and worked first rate; because they didn’t know but 
what it would take three days to fix it. If I’d a called it a 
bolt-head it would a done just as well. 

Nof I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side, 
and pretty uncomfortable all up the other. Being Tom Sawyer 
was easy and comfortable ; and it stayed easy and comfortable 
till by-and-by I hear a steamboat coughing along down the 
river—then I says to myself, s’pose Tom Sawyer come down on 
that boat ?—and s’pose he steps in here, any minute, and sings 
out my name before I can throw him a wink to keep quiet? 
Well, I couldn’t have it that way—it wouldn’t do at all. I 
must go up the road and waylay him. So I told the folks I 
reckoned I would go up to the town and fetch down my bag- 

gage u k 

said no, I could drive the horse myself, and 1 druther he 
wouldn’t take no trouble about me. 


The old gentleman was for going along with me, but I 





IT WAS TOM SAWYKB.’* 


I says: 

CHAPTER XXXIII.

0 I started for town^ in the 
wagon, and when I was 
half-way I see a wagon 
coining, and sure enough 
it was Tom Sawyer, and I 
stopped and waited till he 
come along. I says, “ Hold 
on ! ” and it stopped along¬ 
side, and his mouth opened 
like a trunk, and staid so; 
and he swallowed two or 
three times like a person 
that’s got a dry throat, and 
then says: 

“ I hain’t ever done 
you no harm. You know 
that. So, then, what you 
wan't to come back and 
ha’nt me for ? ” 


^hain’t come back—I hain’t been gone:* 

^ en he heard my voice, it righted him up some, but he 
warn t quite satished yet. He says: 


r 



388 THE ABVEHTXJliES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ Don’t you play nothing on me, because I wouldn’t on you. 
Honest injun, now, you ain’t a ghost? ” 

“Honest injun, I ain’t,” I says. 

“Well—I—I—well, that ought to settle it, of course ; but 
I can’t somehow seem to understand it, no way. Looky here, 
wam’t you ever murdered at all ? ” 

“ No. I warn’t ever murdered at all—I played it on them. 
You come in here and feel of me if you don’t belieVe me.” 

So he done it, and it satisfied him ; and he was that glad to 
see me again, he didn’t know what to do. And he wanted to 
know all about it right off; because it was a grand adventure, 
and mysterious, and so it hit him where he lived. But I said, 
leave it alone till by-and-by; and told his driver to wait, and 
we drove off a little piece, and I told him the kind of a fix I was 
in, and what did he reckon we better do? He said, let him 
alone a minute, and don’t disturb him. So he thought and 
thought, and pretty soon he says: 

“It’s all right, I’ve got it. Take my trunk in your wagon, 
and let on it’s your’n; and you turn back and fool along slow, 
BO as to get to the house about the time you ought to; and I’ll 
go towards town a piece, and take a fresh start, and get there a 
q\iarter or a half an hour after you; and you needn’t let on to 
know me, at first.” 

I says: 

“All right; but wait a minute. There’s one more thing— 
a thing that nobody don’t know but me. And that is, there’s 
a nigger here that I’m a trying to steal out of slavery—and his 
name is Jim —old Miss Watson’s .Tim.” 

He says: 

“ What! Why Jim is-” 

He stopped, and went to studying. I says: 

“ I know what you’ll say. You’ll say it’s dirty low-down 
business ; but what if it is ?—i’m low down ; and I’m agoing 



A NiaOER STEALER. 


830 


to steal him, and I want you to keep mum and not let on. Will 
you ? ” 

His eye lit up, and he says: 

“ I’ll help you steal him! ” 

Well, I let go all holts then, like I was shot. It was the 
most astonishing speech I ever heard—and I’m bound to say 
Tom Sawyer fell, considerable, in my estimation. Only I 
couldn’t believe it. Tom Sawyer a nigger stealer ! 

“ Oh, shucks,” I says, “ you’re joking.” 

“I ain’t joking, either.” 

“Well, then,” I says, “joking or no joking, if you hear any¬ 
thing said about a runaway nigger, don’t forget to remember 
that you don’t know nothing about him, and / don’t know 
nothing about him,” 

Ihen we took the trunk and put it in my wagon, and he 
drove off his way, and I drove mine. But of course I forgot all 
about driving slow, on accounts of being glad and full of think¬ 
ing i so I got home a heap too quick for that length of a trip. 
The old gentleman was at the door, and he says : 

“ Why, this is wonderful. Who ever would have thought it 
was in that mare to do it. I wish we’d a timed her. And she 
ham’t sweated a hair—not a hair. It’s wonderful. Why, I 
wouldn’t take a hunderd dollars for that horse now ; I wouldn’t 

honest; and yet I’d a sold her for fifteen before, and thought 
t’was all she was worth.” 

That’s all he said. He was the innocentest, best old soul I 
ever see. But it warn’t surprising; because he warn’t only just 
a farmer, he was a preacher, too, and had a Uttle one-horse log 
church down bae}c of the plantation, which he built it himself at 
ins own expense, for a church and school-house, and never 
charged nothing for his preaching, and it was worth it, too. 

There was plenty other farmer-preachers Uke that, and done 
the same way, down South 



340 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


Id about half an hour Tom’s wagon drove up to the front 
8ti!e, and Aunt Sally she see it through the window because it 
was only about fifty yards, and says : 

“ Why, there’s somebody come! I wonder who ’tis ? Why, 
I do believe it’s a stranger. Jimmy "(that’s one of the children), 
“run and tell laze to put on another plate for dinner.*’ 

Everybody made a rush for the front door, because, of course, 
a stranger don’t come every year, and so he lays over the yaller 
fever, for interest, when he does come. Tom was over the stile 
and starting for the house; the wagon was spinning up the 
road for the. village, and we was all bunched in the front do{'r. 
Tom had his store clothes on, and an audience—and that was 
always nuts for Tom Sawyer. In them circumstances it wam’t 
no trouble to him to throw in an amount of style that was suit¬ 
able. He warn’t a boy to meeky along up that yard like a 
sheep; no, he come calm and important, like the ram. When he 
got afront of us, he lifts his hat ever so gracious and dainty, 
like it was the lid of a box that had butterflies asleep in it, and 
he didn’t want to disturb them, and says: 

“ Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume? ” 

“No, my boy,” says the old gentleman, “I’m sorry to say 
’t your driver has deceived you; Nichols’s place is down a 
matter of three mile more. Come in, come in.” 

Tom he took a look back over his shoulder, and says, “ Too 
late—he’s out of sight.” 

“ Yes, he’s gone, my son, and you must come in and eat 
your dinner with us; and then we’ll hitch up and take you 
down to Nichols’s.” 

“ Oh, I carCt make you so much trouble, I couldn’t think of 
it. I’ll walk—I don’t mind the distance.” 

“But we won’t let you walk—it wouldn’t be Southern 
hospitality to do it. Come right in.” 

“ Oh, says Aunt Sally; “ it ain’t a bit of trouble to us, 



SOUTBEItA JlOSPJTAZn Y. 


341 


uot a bit in the world. You must stay. It’s a long, dusty 
three mile, and we can't let you walk. And besides, I’ve 
already told ’em to put on another plate, when I see you 
coming; so you mustn’t disappoint us. Come right in, and make 
yourself at home.” 

So Tom he thanked them very hearty and handsome, and 



“MB. ARCHIBALD NICHOLS, I PRESCMBT” 


let himself be persuaded, and come in ; and when he was in, he 
said he was a stranger from Hicksville, Ohio, and his name was 
William Thompson—and he made another bow. 

ell, he run on, and on, and on, making up stuff about 
Hicksville and everybody in it he could invent, and I getting a 
little nervious, and wondering how this was going to help me 
out of my scrape; and at last, still talking along, he reached 



843 TffS ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 


over and kissed Aunt Sally right on the mouth, and then settled 
back again in his chair, comfortable, and was going on talking; 

but she jumped up and wiped it off with the back of her hand, 
and says: 

“ You owdacious puppy! ” 

He looked kind of hurt, and says : 

“ I’m surprised at you, m’am.” 

“ You’re s’rp— ^^^7? what do you reckon I am ? I’ve a 

good notion to take and—say, what do you mean by kissing 


me i 


9 ” 


He looked kind of humble, and says : 

“ I didn’t mean nothing, m’am. I didn’t mean no harm. I 
—I—thought you’d like it.” 

“ AVhy, you bom fool! ” She took up the spinning-stick, 
and it looked like it was all she could do to keep from giving 
him a crack with it. “ What made you think I’d like it ? ” 

“Well, I don't know. Only, they—they—told me you 
would.” 

“ They told you I would. Whoever told you ’s another 

lunatic. I never heard the beat of it. Who’s they ? ” 

“ Why—everybody. They all said so, m’am.” 

It was all she could do to hold in; and her eyes snapped, 
and her fingers worked like she wanted to scratch him ; and 
she says: 

“ Who’s ‘ everybody ? * Out with their names—or ther'Il 
be an idiot short.” 

He got up and looked distressed, and fumbled his hat, and 
says: 

“ I’m sorry, and I wara’t expecting it. They told me to. 
They all told me to. They all said kiss her; and said she’ll 

like it. They all said it—every one of them. But I’m sorry, 

ma’m, and I won’t do it no more—I won’t, honest.” 

“ You won’t, won’t you ? Well, I sh’d reckon you won’t!" 



« rOXJ IMPVDENT YOVNO RASCAtr 


843 


« No’m, I’m honest about it; I won’t ever do it again. Till 
you ask me.” 

“ Till I wik you! Well, I never see the beat of it in my 
bom days! I lay you’ll be the Methusalem-numskull of crea¬ 
tion before ever 7 ask you—or the likes of you.” 

“ Well,” he says, “ it does suqDrise me so. I can’t make it 
out, somehow. They said you would, and I thought you 
would. But—” He stopped and looked around slow, like he 
wished he could run across a friendly eye, somewliere’s; and 
fetched up on the old gentleman’s, and says, “Didn’t yov. think 
she’d like me to kiss her, sir ? ” 

“Why, no, I—I—well, no, I b’lieve I didn’t.” 

Then he looks on around, the same way, to me—and says: 

“ Tom, didn’t yov, think Aunt Sally’d open out her arms 
' and say, ‘ Sid Sawyer-—’ * 

“My land!” she says, breaking in and jumping for him, 
“ you impudent young rascal, to fool a body so—” and was 
going to hug him, but he fended her off, and says: 

“ No, not till you’ve asked me, first.” 

So she didn’t lose no time, but asked him; and hugged him 
and kissed him, over and over again, and then turned him over 
to the old man, and he took what was left. And after they got 
a little quiet again, she says: 

“ Why, dear me, I never see such a surprise. We warn't 
looking for i/ou, at all, but only Tom. Sis never wrote to me 
about anybody coming but him.” 

It s because it wam’t intended for any of us to come but 
Tom, he says; “ but I begged and begged, and at the last 
minute she let me come, too; so, coming down the river, me 
and Tom thought it would be a first-rate surprise for him to 
come here to the house first,and forme to by-and-by tag along 
and drop in and let on to be a stranger. But it was a mistake. 
Aunt Sally. This ain’t no healthy place for a stranger to come,” 



344 TRE AEFENTUEES of HVCKLEBEREY FINF. 

« No—not impudent whelps, Sid. You ought to had yom 
jaws hoxed ; I hain't been so put out since 1 don’t know when. 
But I don’t care, I don’t mind the terms—I’d be willing to 
stand a thousand such jokes to have you here. Well, to think 
of that performance! I don’t deny it, I was most putrified 
with astonishment when you give me that smack.” 

We had dinner out in that broad open passage betwixt the 
house and the kitchen; and there was things enough on that 



k PltEXTY LONG BLESSING. 


table for seven families—and all hot, too ; none of your flabby 
tough meat that’s laid in a cupboard in a damp cellar all night 
and tastes like a bunk of old cold cannibal in the morning. Uncle 
Silas he asked a pretty long blessing over it, but it was worth 
it; and it didn’t cool it a bit, neither, the way I’ve seen them 
kind of interruptions do, lots of times. 

There was a considerable good deal of talk, all the after¬ 
noon, and me and Tom was on the look-out all the time, but it 



TAR AND FEATHERS. 


346 


warn’L no use, they didn’t happen to say nothing about any 
runaway nigger, and we was afraid to try to work uj) to it. But 
at supper, at night, one of the little boys says: 

“ Pa, mayn’t Tom and Sid and me go to the show ? ” 

“ No,” says the old man, “ I reckon there ain’t going to be 
any; and you couldn’t go if there was; because the runaway 
nigger told Burton and me all about that scandalous show, and 
Burton said he would tell the people; so I reckon they’ve drove 
the owdacious loafers out of town before this time.” 

So there it was !—but / couldn’t help it. Tom and me was 
to sleep in the same room and bed ; so, being tired, we bid 
good-night and went up to bed, right after supper, and dumb 
out of the window and down the lightning-rod, and shoved for 
the town; for I didn’t believe anybody was going to give the 
king and the duke a hint, and so, if I didn’t hurry up and give 
them one they’d get into trouble sure. 

On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned 
I was murdered, and how pap disappeared, pretty soon, and 
didn’t come back no more, and what a stir there was when Jim 
run away ; and I told Tom all about our Royal Nonesuch rap¬ 
scallions, and as much of the raft-voyage as I had time to; and 
as we struck into the town and up through the middle of it— 
It was as much as half-after eight, then-here comes a raging 
rush of people, with torches, and an awful whooping and yelling, 
and banging tin pans and blowing horns; and we jumped to 
one side to let them go by; and as they went by, I see they 
ad the king and the duke astraddle of a mil—that is, I knowed 
It the king and the duke, though they was all over tar and 
feathers, and didn’t look like nothing in the world that was 
uman ju^ looked Uke a couple of monstrous big soldier- 
plumes. Well, It made me sick to see it; and I was soriy for 
them poor pitiful rascals, it seemed like I couldn’t ever feel 
any hardness against them any more in the world. It was a 



846 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 


dreadful thing to see. Human beings can be awful cruel to 
one another. 

We see we was too late—couldn’t do no good. We asked 
some stragglers about it, and they said everybody went to the 
show looking very innocent; and laid low and kept dark till the 
poor old king was in the middle of his cavortings on the stage; 
then somebody give a signal, and the house rose up and went 
for them. 



TBAVELLINO BY BAIL. 


So we poked along back home, and I wam’t feeling so brash 
as I was before, but kind of ornery, and humble, and to blame, 
somehow—though / hadn’t done nothing. But that’s always 
the way; it don’t make no difference whether you do right or 
wrong, a person’s conscience ain’t got no sense, and just goes 
for him anyway. If I had a yaller dog that didn’t know no 
more than a person’s conscience does, I would pison him. It 
takes up more room than all the rest of a person’s insides, and 
yet ain’t no good, nohow. Tom Sawyer he says the same. 









'i^^fesSfi^f/ iV y®!^— :r^ 


:av<s: 






Ml 

i*' 

.7' 

M\/ 

rV'yi 

im 

CHAPTER XXXIV.


V(fe stopped talking, and 
^ got to thinking. By- 
and-by Tom says: 

“Looky here, 
Huck, what fools wt 
^ are, to not think of 
™ it before! I bet 
I know where Jim 




f' fyy,. 






rV'y '1 1; «No 1 Where?” 

' ^ r . 'yt jl r “In that hut down 

, l ' 'ill I M by the ash*hopper, 

if/ 

Jjjp ^ U f When we was at din- 

nej., didn’t you see a 
AV. ■ ” ^ nigger man go in there 

■®- '“ with some vittles ? ” 

VITTLZa Ygg » 

“ What did you think the vittles was for ? ” 

“ For a dog.” 

“ So’d I. Well, it wasn’t for a dog,” 

«\STiy?” 

“Because part of it was watermelon." 

So it was I noticed it. Well, it does beat all, that I 


V1TTLZ8. 





W8 THE AVVENTUEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


never thought about a dog not eating watermelon. It shows 
how a body can see and don’t see at the same time.” 

“Well, the nigger unlocked the padlock when he went in, 
and he locked it again when he come out. He fetched uncle 
a key, about the time we got up from table—same key, I bet. 
Watermelon shows man, lock shows prisoner; and it ain’t likely 
there’s two prisoners on such a little plantation, and where the 
people’s all so kind and good. Jim’s the prisoner: All right— 
I’m glad we found it out detective fashion ; I wouldn’t give 
shucks for any other way. Now you work your mind and study 
out a plan to steal Jim, and I will study out one, too; and we’ll 
take the one we like the best.” 

What a head for just a hoy to have! If I had Tom Sawyer’s 
head, I wouldn’t trade it off to be a duke, nor mate of a steam¬ 
boat, nor clown in a circus, nor nothing I can think of, I went 
to thinking out a plan, but only just to be doing something; I 
knowed very well where the right plan was going to come from. 
Pretty soon, Tom says: 

“ Keady ? ” 

“ Yes,” 1 says. 

“All right—bring it out.” 

“ My plan is this,” I says. “ We cau easy find out if it’s 
Jim in there. Then get up my canoe to-morrow night, and 
fetch my raft over from the island. Then the first dark night 
that comes, steal the key out of the old man’s britches, after 
he goes to bed, and shove off down the river on the raft, with 
Jim, hiding day-times and running nights, the way me and Jim 
used to do before. Wouldn’t that plan work?” 

“ Work? Why cert’nly, it would work, like rats a fighting. 
But it’s too blame’ simple; there ain’t nothing to it. What’s 
the good of a plan that ain’t no more trouble than that? It’s 
as mild as goose-milk. Why, Huck, it wouldn’t make no more 
talk than breaking into a soap factory.” 



OUTRA QEOUS. 


349 


I never said nothing, because I warn’t expecting nothing 
different; but I knowed mighty well that whenever he got his 
plan ready it wouldn’t have none of them objections to it. 

And it didn’t. He told me what it was, and I see in a 
minute it was worth fifteen of mine, for style, and would make 
Jim just as free a man as mine would, and maybe get us all 
killed besides. So I was satisfied, and said we would waltz in 
on it. I needn’t tell what it was, here, because 1 knowed it 
wouldn’t stay the way it was. I knowed he would be changing 
it around, every which way, as we went along, and heaving in 
new bnllinesses wherever he got a chance. And tliat is what 
he done. 

Well, one thing was dead sure; and that was, that Tom 
Sawyer was in earnest and was actuly going to help steal that 
nigger out of slavery. That was the thing that was too many 
for me. Here was a boy that was respectable, and well brnng 
up; and had a character to lose ; and folks at home that had 
characters; and he was bright and not leather-headed ; and 
knowing and not ignorant; and not mean, but kind; and yet 
here he was, without any more pride, or rightness, or feeling, 
than to stoop to this business, and make himself a shame, and 
his family a shame, before everybody. I couldn't understand 
it, no way at all. It was outrageous, and I knowed I ought to 
just up and tell him so ; and so be his true friend, and let him 
quit the thing right where he was, and save himself. And I 
did start to tell him ; but he sliut me up, and says: 

“Don’t you reckon I know what I’m about? Don’t I 
generly know what I’m about ? ” 

“ Yes.” 


“ Didn’t I say I 
“ Yes.” 

“ WeM, then.” 


was going to help steal the nigger? ” 


That B all he said, and that’s all I said. It wam’t no use to 


8(S0 THE AEVENTUEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

say any more ; because when he said he’d do a thing, he always 
done it. But I couldn’t make out how he was willing to go 
into this thing ; so I just let it go, and never bothered no more 
about it. If he was bound to have it so, I couldn’t help it 



A SIMPLE JOB. 


When we got home, the house was all dark and still; so we 
went on down to the hut by the ash-hopper, for to examine it. 
We went through the yard, so as to see what the hounds would 
do. They knowed us, and didn’t make no more noise than 
country dogi* is always doing when anything comes by in the 






A SIMPLE JOB. 


351 


night. When we got to the cabin, we took a look at the front 
and the two sides; and on the side I warn’t acquainted with— 
which was the north side—we found a square window-hole, up 
tolerable high, with just one stout board nailed across it. I says: 

« Here’s the ticket. This hole’s big enough for Jim to get 
through, if we wrench off the board.” 

Tom says: 

«It’s as simple as tiWat-toe, three-in-a-row, and as easy as 
placing hooky. I should hope we can find a way that’s a little 

more complicated than tkat^ Huck Finn.” • 

“ Well, tlien,” I says, “ how’ll it do to saw him out, the way 
I done before I was murdered, that time ? ” 

“That’s more like;' he says. “It’s real mysterious, and 
troublesome, and good,” he says; “but I bet we can find a way 
that’s twice as long. There ain’t no hurry ; le’s keep on look¬ 
ing around.” 

Betwixt the hut and the fence, on the back side, was a lean- 
to, that joined the hut at the eaves, and was made out of plank. 
It was as long as the hut, but narrow—only about six foot wide. 
The door to it was at the south end, and was padlocked. Tom 
he went to the soap kettle, and searched around and fetched 
back the iron thing they lift the lid with; so he took it and 
prized out one of the staples. The chain fell down, and we 
opened the door and went in, and shut it, and struck a match, 
and see the shed was only built against the cabin and hadn’t 
no connection with itj and there warn’t no floor to the shed, 
nor nothing in it but some old rusty played-out hoes, and 
spades, and picks, and a crippled plow. The match went out, 
and so did we, and shoved in the staple again, and the door was 
locked as good as ever. Tom was jo 5 fful. He says: 

“ Now we’re all right. We’ll dig him out. It’ll take about 
a week I ” 

Then we started for the house, and I went in the back door 



S&2 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


—you only have to pull a buckskin latch-string, they don’t 
fasten the doors—but that wam’t romantical enough for Tom 
Sawyer: no way would do him but he must climb up the light¬ 
ning-rod. But after he got up half-way about three times, and 
missed fire and fell every time, and the last time most busted 
his brains out, he thought he’d got to give it up ; but after he 
was rested, he allowed he would give her one more turn for 
luck, and this time he made the trip. 

In the morning we was up at break of day, and down to the 
nigger cabins to pet the dogs and make friends with the nigger 
that fed Jim—if it was Jim that was being fed. The niggers 
was just getting through breakfast and starting for the fields ; 
and Jim’s nigger was piling up a tin pan with bread and meat 
and things; and whilst the others was leaving, the key come 
from the house. 

This nigger had a good-natured, chuckle-headed face, and 
his wool was all tied up in little bunches with thread. That 
was to keep witches off. He said the witches was pestering 
him awful, these nights, and making him see all kinds of 
strange things, and hear all kinds of strange words and noises, 
and he didn’t believe he was ever witched so long, before, in 
his life. He got so worked up, and got to running on so about 
his troubles, he forgot all about what he’d been agoing to do. 
So Tom says: 

“What’s the vittles for? Going to feed the dogs?” 

The nigger kind of smiled around graduly over his face, like 
when you heave a brickbat in a mud puddle, and he says: 

“Yes, Mars Sid, a dog. Cur’us dog, too. Does you want 
to go en look at ’im ? ” 

“ Yes.” 

I hunched Tom, and whispers : 

“You going, right here in the day-break? That wam’t 
the plan.” 



VLIMBINO THE LIGIITNINQ-ROD. 


308 


No, it warn’t—but it’s the plan now.'" 

So, drat him, we went along, but I didn’t like it much. 
When we got in, we couldn’t hardly see anything, it was so 
dark; but Jim was there, sure enough, and could see us ; and 
he sings out: 

“ Why Buck! En good Ian* / ain’ dat Misto Tom ? ” 

I just knowed how it would be; I just expected it. 1 
didn’t know nothing to do ; and if I bad, I couldn’t a done it; 
because that nigger busted in and says: 

“ Why, de gracious sakes! do he know you genlmen ? ” 

We could see pretty well, now. lorn he looked at the 
nigger, steady and kind of wondering, and says: 

“ Does who know us ? ” 

“ Why, dish-yer runaway nigger.” 

“I don’t reckon he does; but what put that into your 
head?” 

“ What it dar ? Didn’he jis’dis minute sing out like 
he knowed you ? ” 

Tom says, in a puzzled>up kind of way : 

“Well, that’s mighty curious. Who sung out? When 
did he sing out ? What did he sing out ? ” And turns to me, 
perfectly calm, and says, “ Did you hear anybody sing out ? ” 

Of course there wara’t nothing to be said but the one thing; 
so 1 says: 

“ No; J ain’t heard nobody say nothing.” 

Then he turns to Jim, and looks him over like he never see 
him before ; and says: 

Did you sing out ? ” 

“No, sah,” says Jim ; “ 1 hain’t said nothing, sah.” 

“Not a word?” 

“ No, sah, I bain’t said a word.” 

“ Did you ever see us before ? ” 

“ No, sah j not as I knows oxu** 

A A 


854 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 



So Tom turns to the nigger, which was looking wild and 
distressed, and says, kind of severe: 

“What do you reckon’s the matter with you, anyway? 
What made you think somebody sung out ? ” 

“ Oh, it’s de dad-blame’ witches, sah, en I wisht I was dead, 
I do. Dey’s awluz at it, sah, en dey do mos’ kill me, dey 


WITCHES 

sk’yers me so. Please to don’t tell nobody ’bout it sah, er ole 
Mars Silas he’ll scole me; ’kase he says dey ain't no witches. 
I jis’ wish to goodness he was heah now —den what would he 
say I I jis’ bet he couldn’ fine no way to git aroun’ it dis time. 
But it’s awluz jis’so; people dat’s soty stays sot; dey won’t 



365 


TROUBLED WITH WITCHES. 

look into nothn’ en fine it out fr deyselves, en when you fine 

it out en tell urn ’bout it, dey doan’ b’lieve you.” 

Tom give him a dime, and said we wouldn’t tell nobody ; 

and told him to buy some more thread to tie up his wool with; 

and then looks at Jim, and says; 

» I wonder if Uncle Silas is going to bang this nigg«*r. If 
I was to catch a nigger that was ungrateful enough to run 
away, / wouldn't give him up. I’d hang him.” And whil>t the 
nigger stepped to the door to look at the dime and bite it to 
see if it was good, he whispers to Jim, and says: 

“ Don’t ever let on to know us. And if you hear any dig- 
ging going on nights, it’s us: we’re going to set you free. 

Jim only had time to grab us by the hand and squeeze it, 
then the nigger come back, and we said we’d come again some 
time if the nigger wanted us to; and he said he would, more 
particular if it was dark, because the witches went for him 
mostly in the dark, and it was good to have folks aiound th^^n 


A A 2 





CHAPTER XXXV.


would be most an hour, 
yet, till breakfast, so we 
left, and struck down 
into the woods; because 
Tom said we got to have 
some light to see how 
to dig by, and a lan¬ 
tern makes too much, 
and might get us into 
trouble; what we must 
have was a lot of them 
rotten chunks that’s 
called fox-fire and just 
makes a soft kind of 
a glow when you lay 
them in a dark place. 
We fetched an armf\il 
and hid it in the weeds, 
and set down to rest, 
GETTING WOOD. and Tom says, kind of 

dissatisfied: 

“Blame it, this whole thing is just as easy and awkard as 
it can be. And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a 
difficult plan. There ain’t no watchman to be drugged—now 
there ov,ght to be a watchman. There ain’t even a dog to giv^ 



ESCAPING properly. 




a, sleeping-mixture to. And there’s Jim chained by one leg, 
with a ten-foot chain, to the leg of his bed: why, all you got 
to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off the chain. And 
Uncle Silas he trusts everybody; sends the key to the punkin¬ 
headed nigger, and don’t send nobody to watch the nigger. 
Jim could a got out of that window hole before this, only there 
wouldn’t be no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his 
leg. Why, drat it, Huck, it’s the stupidest arrangement I ever 
see. You got to invent all the difficulties. Well, we cant 
help it, we got to do the best we can with the materials we’ve 
got. Anyhow, there’s one thing—there’s more honour in 
getting him out through a lot of difficulties and dangers, where 
there wam’t one of them furnished to you by the people who 
it was their duty to furnish them, and you had to contrive 
them all out of your own head. Now look at just that one 
thing of the lantern. When you come down to the cold facts, 
we simply got to let on that a lantern’s resky. Why, we could 
work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to, / believe. 
Now, whilst I think of it, we got to hunt up something to 
make a saw out of, the first chance we get.” 

“ What do we want of a saw ? ” 

“What do we want of it? Hain’t we got to saw the leg of 
Jim’s bed off, so as to get the chain loose ? ” 


“ \STiy, you just said a body could lift up the bedstead and 
slip the chain off.” 


“Well, if that ain’t just like you, Huck Finn. You can 
get up the infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing. Why, 
hain’t you ever read any books at all?—Baron Trenck, nor 
Casanova, nor Benvenuto Chelleeny, nor Henri IV., nor none of 
them heroes ? Whoever heard of getting a prisoner loose in 
such an old-maidy way as that? No; the way all the best 
authorities does, is to saw the bed-leg in two, and leave it just 
BO, and swallow the sawdust, so it can’t be found, and put some 


868 TKE ADVENTURES OF SUCKLEBEFRY FINN. 


dirt and grease around the sawed place so the very keenest 
seneskal can’t see no sign of it’s being sawed, and thinks the 
bed-leg is perfectly sound. Then, the night you’re ready, fetch 
the leg a kick, down she goes; slip off your chain, and there 
you are. Nothing to do but hitch your rope-ladder to the 
battlements, shin down it, break your leg in the moat—because 
a rope-ladder is nineteen foot too short, you know—and there’s 
your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and 
fling you across a saddle and away you go, to your native Lan- 
gudoc, or Navarre, or wherever it is. It’s gaudy, Huck. I 
wish there was a moat to this cabin. If we get time, the night 
of the escape, we’U dig one.” 

I says: 

“ What do we want of a moat, when we’re going to snake 
him out from under the cabin ? ” 

Bnt he never heard me. He had forgot me and everything 
else. He had his chin in his hand, thinking. Pretty soon, 
he sighs, and shakes his head; then sighs again, and says: 

“No, it wouldn’t do—there ain’t necessity enough for it.” 

“ For what ? ” I says : 

“ Why, to saw Jim’s leg off,” he says. 

“ Crood land! ” I says, “ why, there ain’t no necessity for it. 
And what would you want to saw his leg off for, anyway?” 

“ Well, some of the best authorities has done it. They 
couldn’t get the chain off, so they just cut their hand off, and 
shoved. And a leg would be better still. But we got to let 
that go. There ain’t necessity enough in this case; and besides, 
Jim’s a nigger and wouldn’t understand the reasons for it, and 
how it’s the custom in Europe; so we’ll let it go. But there’s 
one thing—he can have a rope-ladder; we can tear up our 
sheets and make him a rope-ladder easy enough. And we can 
send it to him in a pie; it’s mostly done that way. And I’ve 
et worse pies.” 



DA^K SCSEMES. 


S69 


« WTiy> Tom Sawyer, how you talk," I says ; Jim ain’t got 
no use for a rope-ladder,” 

“He haa got use for it," How you talk; you better say 
you don’t know nothing about it. He’s got to have a rope- 
ladder ; they all do.” 

“ What in the nation can he do with it ? ” 



OMK OV TUB DBST AUTilOltlTlES, 


“ Do with it ? He can hide it in his bed, can’t he That’s 
what they all do; and kds got to, too. Huck, you don’t ever 
seem to want to do anything that’s regular; you want to be 
starting something fresh all the time. S’pose he don’t do 
nothing with it? ain’t it there in his bed, for a clew, after he’s 
gone ? and don’t you reckon theyTl want clews ? Of course 
they will. And you wouldn’t leave them any ? That would be 


3(jO THE ABVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


a pretty howdj-do, would/rCt it I I never heard of such a 
thing.” 

“ Well,” I says, “ if it’s in the regulations, and he’s got to 
have it, all riglit, let him have it; because 1 don’t wish to go 
back on no regulations; but there’s one thing, Tom Sawyer— 
if we go to tearing up our sheets to make Jim a rope-ladder, 
we’re going to get into trouble with Aunt Sally, just as sure as 
you’re bom. Now, the way I look at it, a hickry-bark ladder 
don’t cost nothing, and don’t waste nothing, and is just as good 
to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick, as any rag 
ladder you can start; and as for Jim, he am’t had no experience, 
and so he don’t care what kind of a-’* 

“ Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, if I was as ignorant as you, I’d 
keep still—that’s what Fd do. Who ever heard of a state 
prisoner escaping by a hickry-bark ladder? Why, it’s perfectly 
ridiculous.” 

“Well, all right, Tom, fix it your own way; but if you’ll 
take my advice, you’ll let me borrow a sheet ofif of the clothes 
line.” 

He said that would do. And that give him another idea, 
and he says: 

“ Borrow a shirt, too.” 

“ What do we want of a shirt, Tom ? ” 

“ Want it for Jim to keep a journal on.” 

“ Joimnal your granny— Jirn, can’t wniu/’ 

S’pose he can't write—he can make marks on the shirt, 
can’t be, if we make him a pen out of an old pewter, spoon or a 
piece of an old iron barrel-hoop ? ” 

“ Why, Tom, we can pull a feather out of a goose and make 
him a better one; and quicker, too.” 

“ Prisonen'8 don’t have geese running around the donjon- 
keep to pull pens out of, you muggins. They always make 
their pens out of the hardest, toughest, troublesomest piece ot 



DARK SCHEMES. 


361 


old brass candlestick or something like that they can get their 
bands on ; and it takes them weeks and weeks, and months 
and months to file it out, too, because they’ve got to do it by 
rubbing it on the walk They wouldn’t use a goose-quill if they 
had it. It ain’t regular.” 

“Well, then, what’ll we make him the ink out of? ” 

“ Many makes it out of iron-rust and tears; but that’s the 
common sort and women; the best authorities uses their own 
blood. Jim can do that; and when he wants to send any little 
common ordinary mysterious message to let the world know 
where’s he’s captivated, he can write it on the bottom of a tin 
plate with a fork and throw it out of the window. The Iron 
Mask always done that, and it’s a blame’ good way, too.” 

“Jim ain’t got no tin plates. They feed him in a pan.” 

we can get him some.” 

“Can’t nobody read his plates? ” 

“That ain’t got nothing to do with it, Huck Finn. All he's 
got to do is to write on the plate and throw it out. Yon don't 
have to be able to read it. Why, half the time you can't read 
anything a prisoner writes on a tin plate, or anywhere else.” 

“ Well, then, what’s the sense in wasting the plates ? ” 

“ Why, blame it all, it ain’t the 'pTi$onei''e plates.” 

“But it’s 80'm.ebody''s plates, ain’t it? ” 

“Well, spos’n it is? What does the ‘prisoner care 
whose-” 


“ That ain’t anything; 


He broke off there, because we heard the breakfast-horn 
blowing. So we cleared out for the house. 

^ Along during that morning I borrowed a sheet and a white 
shirt off of the clothes-line; and I found an old sack and put 
them in it, and we went down and got the fox-fire, and put 
t at in too. I called it borrowing, because that was what pap 
ways called it; but Tom said it wam’t borrowing, it was 
stea ‘ng. He said we was representing prisoners ; and prisonera 


862 THB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

don’t care how they get a thing so they get it, and nobody don’t 
blame them for it, either. It ain’t no crime in a prisoner to 
steal the thing he needs to get away with, Tom said ; it’s his 
right; and so, as long as we was representing a prisoner, we 



THK BUlilAKt'ASX-UORK. 


had a perfect right to steal anything on this place we had the 
least use for, to get ourselves out of prison with. He said if 
we warn’t prisoners it would be a very different thing, and 
nobody but a mean ornery person would steal when he wam’t 



DISCRIMINATION IN STEAZINO. 863 

a prisoner. So we allowed we would steal everything there 
was that come handy. And yet he made a mighty fuss, one 
day, after that, when I stole a watermelon out of the nigger 
patch and eat it; and he made me go and give the niggers a 
dime, without telling them what it was for. Tom said that 
what he meant was, we could steal anything we needed. Well, 

I says, I needed the watermelon. But he said I didn t need it 
to get out of prison with, there’s where the difference was. He 
said if I’d a wanted it to hide a knife in, and smuggle it to 
Jim to kill the seneskal with, it would a been all right. So I 
let it go at that, though I couldn’t see no advantage in my 
representing a prisoner, if I got to set down and chaw over a 
lot of gold-leaf distinctions like that, every time I see a chance 
to hog a watermelon. 

Well, as I was saying, we waited that morning till every¬ 
body was settled down to business, and nobody in sight around 
the yard; then Tom he carried the sack into the lean-to whilst 
I stood off a piece to keep watch. By-and-by he come out, 
and we went and set down on the wood-pile, to talk. He says: 

“ Everything’s all right, now, except tools ; and that’s easy 
fixed.” 

“ Tools ? ” I says. 

“ Yes.” 

“ Tools for what ? ” 

Why, .to dig with. We ain’t agoing to gnaw him out, are 

we?” 

** Ain’t them old crippled picks and things in there good 
enough to dig a nigger out with ? ” I says. 

He turns on me looking pitying enough to make a body cry, 
and says: 

“ Huck Finn, did you ever hear of a prisoner having picks 
and shovels, and all the modern conveniences in his wardrobe 
to dig himself out with ? Now I want to ask you—if you got 



364 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


any reasonableness in you at all—what kind of a show would 
that give .him to be a hero ? Why, they might as well lend him 
the key, and done with it. Picks and shovels—why they wouldn’t 
furnish ’em to a king.” 

“ Well, then,” I says, “ if we don’t want the picks and shovels, 
what do we want ? ” 

A couple of case-knives.” 

“To dig the foundations out from under that cabin, with?” 

« Yes.” 

“ Confound it, it’s foolish, Tom.” 

“ It don’t make no difference how foolish it is, it’s the right 
way—and it’s the regular way. And there ain’t no other way, 
that ever I heard of, and I’ve read all the books that gives any 
information about these things. They always dig out with a 
case-knife—and not through dirt, mind you; generly it’s 
through solid rock. And it takes them weeks and weeks and 
weeks, and for ever and ever. Why, look at one of them prisoners 
in the bottom dungeon of the Castle Deef, in the harbour of 
Marseilles, that dug himself out that way; how long was he 
at it, you reckon ? ” 

“I don’t know.” 

“ Well, guess.” 

“ I don’t know. A month and a half ? ” 

“ Thirty^seven year —and he come out in China. That'e 
the kind. I wish the bottom of this fortress was solid rock.” 

“ Jim don’t know nobody in China,” 

“ What’s that got to do with it ? Neither did that other 
fellow. But you’re always a-wandering off on a side issue. 
Why can’t you stick to the main point ? ” 

“ All right— I don’t care where he comes out, so he comes 
out; and Jim don’t, either, I reckon. But there’s one thing, 
anyway_Jim’s too old to be dug out with a case-knife. He 

won’t last.” 



A DEEP HOLE. 


866 


“Yes he will last, too. You don’t reckon it’s going to take 
thirty-seven years to dig out through a dtri foundation, do 

you ? ” 

“ How long will it take, Tom ? ” 



SilOVCHlNO THB K^nVES. 


“ Well, we can’t resk being as long as we ought to, because 
it mayn’t take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down 
there by New Orleans. He’ll hear Jim ain’t from there. Then 
his next move will be to advertise Jim, or something like that. 
So we can’t resk being as long digging him out as we ought to. 



866 TBE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


By rights I reckon we ought to be a couple of years; but we 
can’t. Things being so uncertain, what I recommend is this: 
that we really dig right in, as quick as we can ; and after that, 
we can let on, to ourselves, that we was at it thirty-seven years. 
Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the first time 
there’s an alarm. Yes, I reckon that’ll be the best way.” 

“ Now, there’s sense in that,” I says. “ Letting on don’t 
cost nothing; letting on ain’t no trouble; and if it’s any object, 
I don’t mind letting on we was at it a hundred and fifty year. 
It wouldn’t strain me none, after I got my hand in. So I’ll 
mosey along now, and smouch a couple of case-knives.” 

“ Smouch three,” he says; “ we want one to make a saw 
out of.” 

« Tom, if it ain’t unregular and irreligious to sejest it,” 1 
says, “there’s an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking 
under the weatherboarding behind the smoke-house.” 

He looked kind of weary and discouraged-like, and says: 

“ It ain’t no use to try to learn you nothing, Huck. Run 
along and smouch the knives—three of them.” So I done it. 





r 



ii_II' 



Qomo DOWN THB L1QHTN1NO>BOD. 

CHAPTER XXXVI.

As soon as we reckoned 
everybody was asleep, that 
night, we went down the 
lightning-rod, and shut our¬ 
selves up in the lean-to, and 
got out oiu- pile of fox-fire, 
and went to work. We cleared 
everything out of the way, 
about four or five foot along 
the middle of the bottom log. 
Tom said he was right behind 
Jim’s bed now, and we’d dig 
in under it, and when we got 
through there couldn’t nobody 
in the cabin ever know there 
was any hole there, because 
Jim’s counterpin hung down 
most to the ground, and you’d 
have to raise it up and look 
under to see the hole. So we 


dug and dug, with the case-knives, till most midnight; and 
then we was dog-tired, and our hands was blistered, and yet 
you couldn t see we’d done anything, hardly. At last I says: 


868 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ This ain’t no thirty-seven year job, this is a thirty-eight 
year job, Tom Sawyer.” 

He never said nothing. But he sighed, and pretty soon he 
stopped digging, and then for a good little while I knowed he 
was thinking. Then he says: 

“ It ain’t no use, Huck, it ain’t agoing to work. If we was 
prisoners it would, because then we’d have as many years as we 
wanted, and no hurry; and we wouldn’t get but a few minutes 
to dig, every day, while they was changing watches, and so our 
hands wouldn’t get blistered, and we could keep it up right 
along, year in and year out, and do it right, and the way it 
ought to be done. But we can’t fool along, we got to rush; 
we ain’t got no time to spare. If we was to put in another 
night this way, we’d have to knock ofif for a week to let our 
bands get well—couldn’t touch a case-knife with them sooner.” 

“ Well, then, what we going to do, Tom ? ” 

“ I’ll tell you. It ain’t right, and it ain’t moral, and I 
wouldn’t like it to get out—but there ain’t only just the one 
way; we got to dig him out with the picks, and let on it’s case- 
knives.” 

“ Now you’re talking! ” I says; “ your head gets leveller 
and leveller all the time, Tom Sawyer,” I says, “Picks is the 
thing, moral or no moral; and as for me, I don’t care shucks 
for the morality of it, nohow. \N’hen I start in to steal a nigger, 
or a watermelon, or a Sunday-school book, I ain’t no ways 
particular how it’s done so it’s done. What I want is ray 
nigger; or what I want is my watermelon; or what I want is 
my Sunday-school book; and if a pick’s the handiest thing, 
that’s the thing I’m agoing to dig that nigger or that water¬ 
melon or that Sunday-school book out with; and I don’t give 
a dead rat what the authorities thinks about it nuther.” 

“ Well,” he says, “ there’s excuse for picks and letting-on 
in a case like this ; if it warn’t so, I wouldn't approve of it, nor 



BIS LEVEL BEST. 


369 


I wouldn’t stand by and see the rules broke—because right is 
right, and wrong is wrong, and a body ain’t got no business 
doing wrong when he ain’t ignorant and knows better. It 
might answer for you to dig Jim out with a pick, without any 
letting-on, because you don’t know no better; but it wouldnt 
for me, because I do know better. Gimme a case-knife.” 

He had his own by him, but I handed him mine. He flung 
it down, and says; 

“Gimme a case-knife** 

I didn’t know just what to do—but then t thought. I 
scratched around amongst the old tools, and got a pick-axe and 
give it to him, and he took it and went to work, and never said 
a word. 

He was always just that particular. Full of principle. 

So then I got a shovel, and then we picked and shovelled, 
turn about, and made the fur fly. We stuck to it about a half 
an hour, which was as long as we could stand up ; but we had 
a good deal of a hole to show for it. When I got upstairs, I 
looked out at the window and see Tom doing his level best 
with the lightning-rod, but he couldn’t come it, his hands was 
so sore. At last he says; 

“It ain’t no use, it can’t be done. What you reckon I 
better do ? Can’t you think up no way ? ” 

“Yes,” I says, “but I reckon it ain’t regular. Come up the 
stairs, and let on it’s a lightning-rod.” 

So he done it. 

Next day Tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick 
in the house, for to make some pens for Jim out of, and six 
tallow candles; and I hung around the nigger cabins, and laid 
for a chance, and stole three tin plates. Tom said it wasn’t 
enough; but I said nobody wouldn’t ever see the plates that 
Jim throwed out, because they’d fall in the dog-fennel and 
jimpson weeds under the window-hole—then we could tote 



870 TEE ADVENTURES OP EUCELEDERRY PINN. 

them back and he could use them over again. So Tom was 
satisfied. Then he says: 

“ Now, the thing to study out is, how to get the things to 
Jim.” 

Take them in through the hole,” I says, “ when we get it 
done.” 



STEALING SPOONS. 


He only just looked scornful, and said something about 
nobody ever heard of such an idiotic idea, and then he went to 
studying. By-and-by he said he had ciphered out two or three 
ways, but there wam’t no need to decide on any of them yet 

Said we’d got to post Jim first. 

That night we went down the lightning-rod a little after 



STEALING SPOONS. 


» 7 \ 

ten, and took one of the candles along, atid listened under the 
window-hole, and heard Jim snoring; so we pitclie<l it in, and 
it didn’t wake him. Then we whirled in with tlie pick and 
shovel, and in about two hours and a half the job was done. 
We crept in under Jim’s bed and into the cabin, and pawed 
around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over Jim a 
while, and found him looking hearty and healthy, and then we 
woke him up gentle and gradual. He was so glad to see us he 
most cried; and called us honey, and all the pet natiies he 
could think of; and was for having us hunt up a cold chisel to 
cut the chain off of his leg with, right away, and clearing out 
without losing any time. But Tom he showed him how un- 
regular it would be, and set down and told him all about our 
plans, and how we could alter them in a minute anytime there 
was an alarm; and not to be the least afraid, because we would 
see he got away, sure. So Jim he said it was all right, and we 
set there and talked over old times a while, and then Tom 
asked a lot of questions, and when Jim told him Uncle Silas 
come in every day or two to pray with him, and Aunt Sally 
. come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty to eat, and 
both of them was kind as they could be, Tom says: 

“ Now I know how to fix it. We’ll send you some things 
by them.” 

I said, “ Don’t do nothing of the kind; it’s one of the most 

_ackass ideas I ever struck; ” but he never paid no attention 

to me; went right on. It was his way when he’d got his plana 
set. 

So he told Jim how we’d have to smuggle in the rope-ladder 
pie, and other large things, by Nat, the nigger that fed him, 
and he must be on the look-out, and not be surprised, and not 
let Nat see him open them; and we would put smaU things in 
uncle s coat pockets and he must steal them out; and we would 
tie things to aunts apron strings or put them in her apron 

9 B 3 


372 TUB ADVENTURES OF SUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


pocket, if we got a chance ; and told him what they would be 
and what they was for. And told him how to keep a journal 
on the shirt with his blood, and all that. He told him every¬ 
thing. Jim he couldn’t see no sense in the most of it, but he 
allowed we was white folks and knowed better than him ; so he 
was satisfied, and said he would do it all just as Tom said. 

Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco; so we had a 
right down good sociable time ; then we crawled out through 
the hole, and so home to bed, with hands that looked like 
they’d been chawed. Tom was in high spirits. He said it was 
the best fun he ever had in his life, and the most intellectural; 
and said if he only could see his way to it we would keep it up 
all the rest of our lives and leave Jim to our children to get 
out; for he believed Jim would come to like it better and 
better the more he got used to it. He said that in that way it 
could be strung out to as much as eighty year, and would be 
the best time on record. And he said it would make us all 
celebrated that had a band in it. 

In the morning we went out to the wood-pile and chopped 
up the brass candlestick into handy sizes, and Tom put them 
and the pewter spoon in his pocket. Then we went to the 
nigger cabins, and while I got Nat’s notice off, Tom shoved a 
piece of candlestick into the middle of a com-pone that was in 
Jim’s pan, and we went along with Nat to see how it would 
work, and it just worked noble; when Jim bit into it it most 
mashed all his teeth out; and there wam’t ever anything could 
a worked better. Tom said so himself. Jim he never let on 
but what it was onlyjust a piece of rock or something like that 
that’s always getting into bread, you know; but after that he 
never bit into nothing but what he jabbed his fork into it in 
three or four places, first. 

And whilst we was a standing there in the dimmish light, 
here comes a couple of the hounds bulging in, from under Jims 


amongst the dogs. 


378 


bed ; and they kept on piling in till there was eleven of them, 
and there warn't hardly room in there to get your breath. By 
jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to door. The nigger Nat 
he only just hollered « witches 1 ” once, and keeled over on to 



TOM ADVISES A WITCH PIE. 

the floor amongst the dogs, and begun to groan like he was 
dying. Tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of Jim’s 
meat, and the dogs went for it, and in two seconds he was out 
himself and back again and shut the door, and I knowed he’d 
fixed the other door too. Then he went to work on the nigger. 


374 THE ABVEHTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 


coaxing him and petting him, and asking him if he’d been 
imagining he saw something again. He raised up, and blinked 
his eyes around, and says: 

“ Mars Sid, you’ll say I’s a fool, but if I didn’t b’lieve.I see 
most a million dogs, er devils, er some’n, I wisht I may die right 
heah in dese tracks. I did, mos’ sboly, Jlars Sid, I felt um— 
Ifelt um, sah ; dey was all over me. Dad fetch it, I jis’ wisht 
I could git my ban’s on one er dem witches jis’ wunst—on’y 
jis’ wunst—it’s all Pd ast. But mos’Iy I wisht dey’d lemme 
’lone, I does.” 

Tom says: 

“Well, I tell you what / think. WTiat makes them come 
here just at this runaway nigger’s breakfast-time ? It’s because 
they’re hungry; that’s the reason. You make them a witch 
pie ; that’s the thing for you to do.” 

“ But my Ian’, Mars Sid, how’s I gwyne to make’m a witch 
pie ? I doan* know how to make it. I hain’t ever beam ei 
Bich a thing b’fo’.” 

“Well, then, I'll have to make it myself.” 

“ Will you do it, honey?—will you ? I’ll wusshup de groun' 
und’ yo’ foot, I will! ” 

“ All right, I’ll do it, seeing it’s you, and you’ve been good 
to us and showed us the runaway nigger. But you got to be 
migbty careful. When we come around, you turn your back; 
and then whatever we’ve put iu the pan, don’t you let on you 
see it at all. And don’t you look, when Jim unloads the pan— 
something might happen, I don’t know what. And above all, 
don’t you handle the witch-things.” 

“ Hannel ’m Mars Sid ? What is you a talkin’ ’bout ? I 
wouldn’ lay de weight er my finger on um, not fr ten bund’d 
thous’n’ billion dollars, I wouldn’t.” 




T11& BUDBAQE-PILB. 

CHAPTER XXXVII.


was all fised. So then 
we went away and went 
to the rubbage-pile in 
the back yard where 
they keep the old boots, 
and rags, and pieces of 
bottles, and wore-out tin 
things, and all such 
truck, and scratched 
around and found an old 
tin wash-pan and stopped 
up the holes as well as 
we could, to bake the 
pie in, and took it down 
cellar and stole it full of 
flour, and started for 
breakfast and found a 


couple of shingle-nails that Tom said would be handy for a 
prisoner to scrabble his name and sorrows on the dungeon walls 
with, and dropped one of them in Aunt Sally’s apron pocket 
which was hanging on a chair, and t’other we stuck in the band 
of Uncle Silas’s hat, which was on the bureau, because we heard 
the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway 
nigger’s house this morning, and then went to breakfast, and 




376 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


Tom dropped the pewter spoon in Uncle Silas’s coat pocket, and 
Aunt Sally wasn’t come yet, so we had to wait a little while. 

And when she come she was hot, and red, and cross, and 
couldn’t hardly wait for the blessing; and then she went to 
sluicing out cofifee with one hand and cracking the handiest 
child’s head with her thimble with the other, and says: 

“ I’ve hunted high, and I’ve hunted low, and it does beat 
all, what hm become of your other shirt.” 

My heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things, 
and a hard piece of com-crust started down my throat after it 
and got met on the road with a cough and was shot across the 
table and took one of the children in the eye and curled him 
up like a fishing-worm, and let a cry out of him the size of a 
war-whoop, and Tom he turned kinder blue around the gills, 
and it all amounted to a considerable state of things for about 
a quarter of a minute or as much as that, and I would as old 
out for half price if there was a bidder. But after that we was 
all right again—it was the sudden surprise of it that knocked 
us so kind of cold. Uncle Silas he says : 

“ I’s most uncommon curious, I can’t understand it. I 
know perfectly well I took it offy because-” 

“ Because you hain’t got but one on. Just listen at the 
man! 1 know you took it off, and know it by a better way 

than your wool-gethering memory, too, because it was on the 
clo’es-line yesterday—I see it there myself. But it’s gone— 
that’s the long and the short of it, and you’ll just have to change 
to a red flann’l one till I can get time to make a new one. And 
it’ll be the third I’ve made in two years; it just keeps a body on 
the jump to keep you in shirts ; and whatever you do manage to 
do with’m all, is more’n 7 can make out. A body’d think you 
would learn to take some sort of care of ’em, at your time of 
life.” 

“ I know it. Sally, and I do try all I can. But it oughtn’t 



THE LAST SHIRT. 


377 


to be altogether my fault, because you know I don’t see them 
nor have nothing to do with them except when they’re on me ; 
and I don’t believe I’ve ever lost one of them off of me.” 

“ Well, it ain’t your fault if you haven’t, Silas—you’d a 
done it if you could, I reckon. And the shirt ain t all that s 
gone, nuther, Ther’s a spoon gone ; and that ain t all. Ihere 
was ten, and now ther’s only nine. The calf got the shirt 1 
reckon, but the calf never took the spoon, thaVe certain.” 

“ Why, what else is gone, Sally ? ” 

“Ther’s six candles gone—that’s what. The rats could a 
got the candles, and I reckon they did; I wonder they don’t 
walk off with the whole place, the way you’re always going to 
stop their holes and don’t do it j and if they wam’t fools they’d 
sleep in your hair, Silas— you'd never find it out; but you 
can’t lay the spoon on the rats, and that I know." 

“Well, Sally, I’m in fault, and I acknowledge it; I’ve been 
remiss; but I won’t let to-morrow go by without stopping up 
them holes.” 

“ Oh, I wouldn’t hurry, next year’ll do. Matilda Angelina 
Araminta Phelps! ” 

Whack comes the thimble, and the child snatches her claws 
out of the sugar-bowl without fooling around any. Just then, 
the nigger woman steps on to the passage, and says: 

“ Missus, dey*8 a sheet gone.” 

“ A sheet gone ! Well, for the land’s sake I ” 

“ I’ll stop up them holes to-dayy" says Uncle Silas, looking 
sorrowful. 


“ Oh, do shet up I— s’pose the rats took the sheet t Where’s 
it gone, Lize ? ” 

“ Clah to goodness I hain’t no notion, Miss Sally. She 
WU2 on de clo’s-line yistiddy, but she done gone; she ain’ dah 
no mo*, now.” 

“ I reckon the world is coining to an end. I never see the 



878 THE ADVENTTJEES OF HUCKLEBERRY IINN, 


beat of it, in all my born days. A shirt, and a sheet, and a 
spoon, and six can-” 

“Missus,” comes a young yaller wench, “dey’a a brass 
cannelstick miss’n.” 

“ Cler out from here, you hussy, a Fll take a skillet 
to ye I ” 



“MISSUS, dey’s a sheet aONB.” 

Well, she was just a biling. I begun to lay for a chance; 
I reckoned I would sneak out and go for the woods till the 
weather moderated. She kept a raging right along, running 
her insurrection all by herself, and everybody else mighty meek 
and quiet; and at last Uncle Silas, looking kind of foolish, 




MOONING AROUNlJ. 


379 


fishes up that spoon out of his pocket. She stopped, with her 
mouth open and her hands upj and as for me, 1 wished I wag 
in Jeruslem or somewheres. But not long; because she 
says: 

“ It’s just as I expected. So you had it in your pocket all 
the time; and like as not you’ve got the other things there, 
too. How’d it get there ? ” 

“ I reely don’t know, Sally,” he says, kind of apologising, 
“ or you know I would tell. I was a-studying over my text in 
Acts Seventeen, before breakfast, and I reckon I put it in 
there, not noticing, meaning to put my Testament in, and it 
must be so, because my Testament ain’t in, but I’ll go and see, 
and if the Testament is where I had it, I’ll know I didn’t put 
it in, and that will show that I laid the Testament down and 
took up the spoon, and-” 

“ Ob, for the land’s sake! Give a body a rest I Go ’long 
now, the whole kit and biling of ye ; and don’t come nigh me 
again till I’ve got back my peace of mind.” 

rd a heard her, if she’d a said it to herself, let alone speak¬ 
ing it out; and I’d a got up and obeyed her, if I’d a been dead. 
As we was passing through the setting-room, the old man he 
took up his hat, and the shingle-nail fell out on the floor, and 
he just merely picked it up and laid it on the mantel-shelf, and 
never said nothing, and went out. Tom see him do it, and 
remembered about the spoon, and says : 

“ Well, it ain’t no use to send things by him no more, he 

ain’t reliable.” Then he says: « But he done us a good turn 

with the spoon, anyway, without knowing it, and so we’ll go 

and do him one without him knowing it^stop up his rat- 
holes.” 

There was a noble good lot of them, down cellar, and it 
took us a whole hour, but we done the job tight and good, and 

ship-shape. Then we heard steps on the stairs, and blowed out 

* 


380 THE ADVEXTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 


our light, and hid ; and here comes the old man, with a candle 
in one hand and a bundle of stuff in t’other, looking as absents 
minded as year before last. He went a mooning around, first 
to one rat-hole and then another, till he’d been to them all. 
Then he stood about five minutes, picking tallow-drip off of 
his candle and thinking. Then he turns off slow and dreamy 
towards the stairs, saying: 

“Well, for the life of me I can’t remember when I done it. 
I could show her now that I wam’t to blame on account of the 
rats. But never mind—let it go. I reckon it wouldn’t do no 
good.” 

And so he went on a mumbling upstairs, and then we left. 
He was a mighty nice old man. And always is. 

Tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon, 
but he said we’d got to have it; so he took a think. When he 
had ciphered it out, he told me how we was to do; then we 
went and waited around the spoon-basket till we see Aunt 
Sally coming, and then Tom went to counting the spoons and 
laying them out to one side, and I slid one of them up my 
sleeve, and Tom says : 

“ Why, Aunt Sally, there ain’t but nine spoons, yet.” 

She says: 

“Go ’long to your play, and don’t bother me. I know 
belter, I counted’m myself.” 

“ Well, I’ve counted them twice. Aunty, and 1 can’t make 
but nine.” 

She looked out of all patience, but of course she come to 
count—anybody would. 

“ I declare to gracious ther’ airCt but nine! ” she says. 
“ Why, what in the world—plague take the things, I’ll count 

*m again.” 

So I slipped back the one I had, and when she got done 
counting, she says s 



•*IN A TEARISO WAY” 


381 


“ Hang the troublesome rubbage, ther’s ten, nowl” and she 
looked huffy and bothered both. But Tom says: 

“ WTiy, Aunty, 1 don’t think there’s ten.” 

“ You numskull, didn’t you see me count 'in ? 

“ I know, but-” 

“Well, I’ll count’m again” 



ly ▲ T1£AKU10 WAY. 


So I smouched one, and they come out nine same as the 
other time. Well, she was in a tearing way—just a trembling 
all over, she was so mad. But she counted and counted, till 
she got that addled she’d start to count-in the basket for a spoon, 
sometimes; and so, three times they come out right, and three 
times they come out wrong. Then she grabbed up the basket 



S82 TUB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat galley- 
west ; and she said cle’r out and let her have some peace, and 
if we come bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner, 
she’d skin us. So we had the odd spoon; and dropped it in 
her apron pocket whilst she was a giving us our sailing-orders, 
and Jim got it all right, along with her shingle-nail, before 
noon. We was very well satisBed with this business, and Tom 
allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took, because he said 
now she couldn’t ever count them spoons twice alike again to 
save her life ; and wouldn’t believe she’d counted them right, 
if she did • and said that after she’d about counted her head 
off, for the next three days, he judged she’d give it up and offer 
to kill anybody that wanted her to ever count them any more. 

So we put the sheet back on the line, that night, and stole 
one out of her closet. and kept on putting it back and stealing 
it again, for a couple of days, till she didn’t know how many 
sheets she had, any more, and said she didn’t care, and wam’t 
agoing to bullyrag the rest of her soul out about it, and 
wouldn’t count them again not to save her life, she druther die 
first. 

So we was all right now, as to the shirt and the sheet and 
the spoon and the candles, by the help of the calf and the rats 
and the mixed-up counting; and as to the candlestick, it warn’t 
no consequence, it would blow over by-and-by. 

But that pie was a job ; we had no end of trouble with that 
pie. We fixed it up away down in the woods, and cooked it 
there; and we got it done at last, and very satisfactory, too; 
but not all in one day; and we had to use up three wash-pans 
full of flour, before we got through, and we got burnt pretty 
much all over, in places, and eyes put out with the smoke; 
because, you see, we didn’t want nothing but a crust, and we 
couldn’t prop it Op right, and she would always cave in. But 
course we thought of the right way at last; which was to 



THE WITCH PIE. 


383 


cook the ladder, too, in the pie. So then we bid in with Jim, 
the second night, and tore up the sheetall in little strings,and 
twisted them together, and long before daylight we had a lovely 
rope, that you could a hung a person with. We let on it took 
nine months to make it. 

And in the forenoon we took it down to the woods, but it 



ONK OP HIS ANCESTORS. 


wouldn’t go in the pie. Being made of a whole sheet, that way, 
there was rope enough for forty pies, if we’d a wanted them, and 
plenty left over for soup, or sausage, or anything you choose. 
We could a had a whole dinner. 

But we didn’t need it. All we needed was just enough for 
the pie, and so we throwed the rest away. We didn’t cook 
none of the pies in the washpan, a&aid the solder would melt; 



384 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


hut Uncle Silas he had a noble brass warming-pan which he 
thought considerable of, because it belonged one of his 
ancestors with a long wooden handle that come over from 
England with William the Conqueror in the Mayflower or one 
of them early ships and was hid away up garret with a lot of 
other old pots and things that was valuable, not on account of 
being any account because they warn’t, but on account of them 
being relicts, you know, and we snaked her out, private, and 
took her down there, but she failed on the first pies, because 
we didn’t know how, but she come up smiling on the last one. 
We took and lined her with dough, and set her in the coals, 
and loaded her up with rag-rope, and put on a dough roof, and 
shut down the lid, and put hot embers on top, and stood off 
five foot, with the long handle, cool and comfortable, and in 
fifteen minutes she turned out a pie that was a satisfaction to 
look at. But the person that et it would want to fetch a 
couple of kags of toothpicks along, for if that rope-ladder 
wouldn’t cramp him down to business, I don’t know nothing 
what I’m talking about, and lay him in enough stomach-ache 
to last him till next time, too. 

Nat didn’t look, when we put the witch-pie in Jim’s pan; 
and we put the three tin plates in the bottom of the pan under 
the vittles; and so Jim got everything all right, and as soon 
as he was by himself he busted into the pie and hid the rope- 
ladder inside of his straw tick, and scratched some marks on a 
tin plate and throwed it out of the winaow-hole. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

them pens was a 
distressid-tough job, 
and so was the saw; 
and Jim allowed the 
inscription was going 
to be the toughest of 
all. That’s the one 
which the prisoner 
has to scrabble on the 
wall. But we had to 
have it; Tom said 
we’d got to: there 
warn’t no case of a 
state prisoner not 
scrabbling his inscrip¬ 
tion to leave behind, 
and his coat of arms. 

“ Look at Lady 
Jane Grey,” he says ; 
“ look at Gilford Dud¬ 
ley 5 look at old North¬ 
umberland ! Why, Huck, s’pose it is considerble trouble ?— 
what yon going to do?—how you going to get around it? 
Jim s got to do his inscription and coat of arms. They all do.” 


Jin’s GOAT OF AQUa 



886 TBB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


Jim says: 

“ Why, Mars Tom, I hain’t got no coat o’ arms; I hain’t 
got nuflfn but dish-yer ole shirt, en you knows I got to keep de 
journal on dat.” 

“ Oh, you don’t understand, Jim; a coat of arms is verj 
different.” 

“ Well,” I says, “ Jim’s right, anyway, when he says he 
hain’t got no coat of arms, because he hain’t.” 

“I reckon I knowed that,” Tom says, “but you bet he’ll 
have one before he goes out of this—because he’s going out 
rights and there ain’t going to be no flaws in his record.” 

So whilst me and Jim filed away at the pens on a brickbat 
apiece, Jim a making hia’n out of the brass and I making mine 
out of the suoon, Tom set to work to think out the coat of 
arms. By-and-by he said he’d struck so many good ones he 
didn’t hardly know which to take, but there was one which he 
reckoned he’d decide on. He says: 

“ On the scutcheon we’ll have a bend or in the dexter base, 
a saltire murrey in the fess, with a dog, couchant, for common 
charge, and under his foot a chain embattled, for slavery, with 
a chevron vert in a chief engrailed, and three invected lines on 
a field dzure^ with the nombril points rampant on a dancette 
indented; crest, a runaway nigger, sabUy with his bundle over his 
shoulder on a bar sinister: and a couple of gules for supporters, 
which is you and me; motto, Maggiore frettHy minore atto* 
Grot it out of a book—means, the more haste, the less speed.” 

“ Geewhillikins,” I says, “ but what does the rest of it 
mean i 

ain’t got no time to bother over that,” he says, “ we 
got to dig in like all git-out.” 

“Well, anyway,” I says, “ what's some of it? What’s a fess?” 

“ A fess—a fess is —you don’t need to know what a fess is. 
X’ll show him how to make it when he gets to it.” 



THE COAT OF AJIMH. 


887 


“Shucks, Tom,” I says, “I think you might tell a person. 
What’s a bar sinister ? ” 

“Oh, I don’t know. But he’s got to have it. All the 
nobility does.” 

That was just his way. If it didn’t suit him to explain a 
thing to you, he wouldn’t do it. You might pump at him a 
week, it wouldn’t make no difference. 

He’d got all that coat of arms business fixed, so now he 
started in to finish up the rest of that part of the work, which 
was to plan out a mournful inscription—said Jim got to have 
one, like they all done. He made up a lot, and wrote them 
out on a paper, and read them off, so; 

1. Here a captive heart busted. 

2. Here a poor prisoner, forsook by the world and friends, 
fretted out his sorrowful life. 

3. Here a lonely heart broke, and a worn spirit went to 
its rest, after thirty-seven years of solitary captivity. 

4. Here, homeless and friendless, after thirty-seven years 
of hitter captivity, perished a noble stranger, natural son of 
Lov-is XIV. 

Tom’s voice trembled, whilst he was reading them, and he 
most broke down, W hen he got done, he couldn’t no wav make 
up his mind which one for Jim to scrabble on to the wall, they 
was all so good; but at last he allowed he would let him scrabble 
them all on. Jim said it would take him a year to scrabble 
such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail, and he didn’t 
know how to make letters, besides; but Tom said he would 
block them out for him, and then he wouldn’t have nothing 
to do but just follow the lines. Then pretty soon he says : 

* Come to think, the logs ain’t agoing to do; they don’t 
have log walls in a dungeon : we got to dig the inscriptions into 
a rock. We’ll fetch a rock.” 


« c 2 



W8 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


Jim said the rock was worse than the logs; he said it would 
take him such a pison long time to dig them into a rock, he 
wouldn’t ever get out. But Tom said he would let me help 
him do it. Then he took a look to see how me and Jim was 
getting along with the pens. It was most pesky tedious hard 
work and slow, and didn’t give my hands no show to get well 
of the sores, and we didn’t seem to make no headway, hard.ly. 
So Tom says: 

“I know how to fix it. We got to have a rock for the coat 
of arms and mournful inscriptions, and we can kill two birds 
with that same rock. There’s a gaudy big grindstone down at 
the mill, and we’ll smouch it, and carve the things on it, and 
file out the pens and the saw on it, too.” 

It waru’t no slouch of an idea ; and it wam’t no slouch of a 
grindstone niither; but we allowed we’d tackle it. It wam’t 
quite midnight, yet, so we cleared out for the mill, leaving Jim 
at work. We smouched the grindstone, and set out to roll her 
home, but it was a most nation tough job. Sometimes, do 
what we could, we couldn’t keep her from falling over, and she 
come mighty near mashing us, every time. Tom said she was 
going to get one of us, sure, before we got through. We got 
her half way; and then we was plumb played out, and most 
drownded with sweat. We see it wara’t no use, we got to go 
and fetch Jim. So he raised up his bed and slid the chain off 
of the bed-leg, and wrapt it round and round his neck, and we 
crawled out through our hole and down there, and Jim and me 
•laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing; 
and Tom superintended. He could out-superintend any boy I 
ever see. He knowed how to do everything. 

Our hole was pretty big, but it wara’t big enough to get 
the grindstone through ; but Jim he took the pick and soon 
made it big enough. Then Tom marked out them things on 
it with the nail, and set Jim to work on them, with the nail for 



3»‘J 



A SKILLED SUPEItlMlCSDEyT. 

a chisel and an iron bolt from the ruhbage in the lean-to for a 
hammer, and told him to work till the rest of his candle quit 
on him, and then he could go to bed, and hide the grindstone 
under his straw tick and sleep on it. Ihen we helped him fix 
his chain back on the bed-leg, and was ready for bed omselv(*s 


ness 


som( 










S90 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ It’s a good idea. And I reckon it’s been done. It musi 
a bi>en done ; it stands to reason. Yes, it’s a prime good idea. 
Where could you keep it ? ” 

“ Keep what, Mars Tom ? ” 

“ Why, a rattlesnake.” 

“ De goodness gracious alive, Mars Tom ! Why, if dey was 
a rattlesnake to come in heah, I’d take en bust right out thoo 
lat log wall, I would, wid my head.” 

“Why, Jim, you wouldn’t be afraid of it, after a little. 
You could tame it.” 

« Tame it! ” 

‘‘Yes—easy enongh. Every animal is grateftil for kindness 
and petting, and they wouldn’t think of hurting a person that 
pets them. Any book will tell you that. You try—that’s all 
I ask ; just try for two or three days. Why, you can get him 
so, in a little while, that he’ll love you; and sleep with you; 
and won’t stay away from you a minute ; and will let you wrap 
him round your neck and put his head in your mouth.” 

“ Please, Mars Tom— doan^ talk so! I can’t stan^ it! 
He’d let me shove his head in my mouf—fer a favour, hain’t 
it ? I lay he’d wait a pcfw’ful long time ’fo’ I ast him. Ed 
mo’ en dat, I doan’ want him to sleep wid me.” 

“Jim, don’t act so foolish. A prisoner’s got to have some 
kind of a dumb pet, and if a rattlesnake bain’t ever been tried, 
why, ther’s more glory to be gained in your being the first to 
ever try it than any other way you could aver think of to save 
your life.” 

“ Why, Mars Tom, I doan* want no sich glory. Snake 
take ’n bite Jim’s chin off, den whah is de glory? No, sah, I 
doan’ want no sich doin’s.” 

“ Blame it, can’t you try ? I only want you to try—^you 
needn’t keep it up if it don’t work.” 

“ But de trouble all done, ef de snake bite me while Is a 



UNPLEASANT GLORY. 

tryin’ him. Mars Tom, Ts willin’ to tackle mos’ anything ’at 
ain’t onreasonable, but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake m 
heah for me to tame, I’s gwyne to leave^ dat’s shore'" 

« Well, then, let it go, let it go, if you’re so buUheaded about 
it. We can get you socie garter-snakes and you can tie some 
buttons on their tails, and let on they’re rattlesnakes, and I 
reckon that’ll have to do.” 

«I k’n sUn’ dm, Mars Tom, but blame’ ’f I couldn’ get 



along w\dout um, I tell you dat. I never knowed bfo, t was 
80 much bother and trouble to be a prisoner.” 

“Well, it always is, when it’s done right. You got any 

rats around here ? ” 

“No, sah, I hain’t seed none.” 

“Well, we’U get you some rats.” 

“ Why, Mars Tom, I doan’ want no rats. Dey’s de dad- 
blamedest crcture to ’sturh a body, en rustle roun’ over ’im, en 
bite his feet, when he’s tryin’ to sleep, 1 ever see. No, sah, 



892 TKE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

gimme g yarter-snakes ’f I’s got to have *m, but doau’ gimme 
no rats, I ain’ got no use fr um, skasely.” 

“But Jim, you got to have ’em—they all do. So don’t make 
no more fuss about it. Prisoners ain’t ever without rats. 
There aint no instance of it. And they train them, and pet 
them, and learn them tricks, and they get to be as sociable as 
flies. But you got to play music to them. You got anything 
to play music on ? ” 

“I ain’ got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o’ paper, en 
a juice-harp; but I reck’n dey wouldn’take no stock in a juice- 
harp.” 

“ Yes they would. They don’t care what kind of music ’tis. 
A jew-sharp’s plenty good enough for a rat. All animals likes 

music—in a prison they dote on it. Specially, painful music; 
and you can’t get no other kind out of a jews-harp. It always 
interests them; they come out to see what’s the matter with 
you. Yes, you’re all right; you’re 6xed very well. You want 
to set on your bed, nights, before you go to sleep, and early in 
the mornings, and play your jews-harp; play The Last Link is 
Broken—that’s the thing that’ll scoop a rat, qUicker’n anything 
else; and when you’ve played about two minutes, you’ll see all 
the rats, and the snakes, and spiders, and things begin to feel 
worried about you, and come. And they’ll just fairly swarm 
over you, and have a noble good time.” 

“ Yes, dey will, I reck’n. Mars Tom, hut what kine er time 
is Jim havin’? Blest if I kin see de pint. But I’ll do it ef I 
got to. I reck’n I better keep de animals satisfied, en not 
have no trouble in de house.” 

Tom waited to think over, and see if there wasn’t nothing 
else; and pret^ soon he says: 

“ Oh—there’s one thing I forgot. Could you raise a flower 
here, do you reckon ? ” 

“ I doan’ know but maybe I could, Mars Tom ; but it’s 



A TEARFUL SUBJECT. 


398 


fcolable dark in heah, en I ain* got no use fr no flower, nohow, 
en she’d be a pow’ful sight o’ trouble.” 

“ Well, you try it, anyway. Some other prisoners has 
done it,” 

“ One er dem big cat-tail-lookin’ muUen-stalks would grow in 
heah, Mars Tom, I reck’n, but she wouldn’ be wuth half de 
trouble she’d coss.” 

“ Don’t you believe it. We il fetch you a little one, and you 



IRniOATION. 


plant it in the comer, over there, and raise it. And don’t call 
it mullen, call it Pitchiola—that’s its right name, when it’s in 
a prison. And you want to water it with your tears.” 

“ MTxy, T got plenty spring water, Mars Tom.” 

“ You don’t want spring water; you want to water it with 
your tears. It’s the way they always do.” 

“ Why, Mars Tom, I lay I kin raise one er dem mullen- 
stalks twyste wid spring water whiles another man’s a storfn 
one wid tears.” 





394 TBB ADVENTURES OF BUCKLLBERRY FINN. 


\ 

“ That ain’t the idea. You got to do it with tears.” 

“ She’ll die on my ban’s, Mars Tom, she sholy will; kase I 
doan’ skasely ever cry.” 

So Tom was stumped. But he studied it over, and then 
said Jim would have to worry along the best he could with an 
onion. He promised he would go to the nigger cabins and 
drop one, private, in Jim’s coflfee pot, in the morning. Jim 
said he would “jis’ ’s soon have tobacker in his coffee;” and 
found so much fault with it, and with the work and bother of 
raising the mullen, and jews-harping the rats, and petting 
and flattering up the snakes and spiders and things, on top 
of all the other work he had to do on pens, and inscriptions, 
and journals, and things, which made it more trouble and 
worry and responsibility to be a prisoner than anything he 
ever undertook, that Tom most lost all patience with him; 
and said he was just loadened down with more gaudier 
chances than a prisoner ever had in the world to make a 
name for himself, and yet he didn’t know enough to appre¬ 
ciate them, and they was just about wasted on him. So Jim 
he was sorry, and said he wouldn’t behave so no more, and then 
me and Tom shoved for bed. 




OFF DULL T1UB8. 


keep off the dull times for her. 

CHAPTER XXXIX.

N the morning we went up to 
the village and bought a wire 
rat trap and fetched it down, 
and unstopped the best rat 
hole, and in about an hour we 
had fifteen of the buIUest kind 
of ones; and then we took it 
and put it in a safe place under 
Aunt Sally’s bed. But while 
we was gone for spiders, little 
Thomas Franklin Benjamin 
Jefferson Elexander Phelps 
found it there, and opened the 
door of it to see if the rats 
would come out, and they 
did; and Aunt Sally she come 
in, and when we got back she 
was a standing on top of the 
bed raising Cain, and the rats 
was doing what they could to 
So she took and dusted us both 
much as two hours catching 


with the hickry, and we was as 

another fifteen or sixteen, drat that meddlesome cub, and the 
warn t the likeliest, nuther, because the first haul was the pic 


S96 THE ADVENTUBES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINK. 


of the flock. I never see a likelier lot of rats than what that 
first haul was. 

1 

We got a splendid stock of sorted spiders, and bugs, and 
frogs, and caterpillars, and one thing or another; and we like-to 
got a hornet’s nest, but we didn’t. The family was at home. 
We didn’t give it right up, but staid with them as long as we 
could ; because we allowed we’d tire them out or they’d got to 
tire us out, and they done it. Then we got allycumpain and 
rubbed on the places, and was pretty near all right again, but 
couldn’t set down convenient. And so we went for the snakes, 
and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes, and 
put them in a bag, and put it in our room, and by that time it 
was supper time, and a rattling good honest day’s work; and 
hungry ?—oh, no, I reckon not I And there wam’t a blessed 
snake up there, when we went back—we didn’t half tie the 
sack, and they worked out, somehow, and left. But it didn’t 
matter much, because they was still on the premises some - 
wheres. So we judged we could get some of them again. No, 
there warn’t no real scarcity of snakes about the house for a 
considerble spell. You’d see them dripping from the rafters 
and places, every now and then; and they generly landed in 
your plate, or down the back of your neck, and most of the time 
where you didn’t want them. Well, they was handsome, and 
striped, and there wam’t no harm in a million of them; but 
that never made no difference to Aunt Sally, she despised 
snakes, be the breed what they might, and she couldn’t stand 
them no way you could fix it; and every time one of them 
flopped down on her, it didn’t make no difference what she was 
doing, she would just lay that work down and light out. I 
never see such a woman. And you could hear her whoop to 
Jericho. You couldn’t get her to take aholt of one of them 
with the tongs. And if she turned over and found one in bed, 
she would scramble out and lift a howl that you would think 



LIVELY BEDFELLOWS. 


397 


tbe house was afire. She disturbed the old man so, that he 
said he could most wish there hadn’t ever been no snakes 
created. Why, after every last snake had been gone clear out 
of the house for as much as a week, Aunt Sally warn’t over it 
yet; she wam’t near over it; when she was setting thinking 
about something, you could touch her on the back of her neck 
with a feather and she would jump right out of her stockings. 
It was very curious. But Tom said all women was just so. 
He said they was made that way j for some reason or other. 

We got a licking every time one of our snakes come in her 
way; and she allowed these lickings warn’t nothing to what 
she would do if we ever loaded up the place again with them. 

I didn’t mind the lickings, because they didn’t amount to 
nothing; but I minded the trouble we had, to lay in another 
lot. But we got them laid in, and all the other things ; and 
you never see a cabin as blithesome as Jim’s was when they’d all 
swarm out for music and go for him. Jim didn’t like the 
spiders, and the spiders didn’t like Jim; and so they’d lay for 
« him and make it mighty warm for him. And he said that 
between the rats, and the snakes, and the grindstone, there 
wam’t no room in bed for him, skasely j and when there was, a 
body couldn’t sleep, it was so lively, and it was always lively, 
said, because they never all slept at one time, but took turn 
^^bout, so when the snakes was asleep the rats was on deck, and 
when the rats turned in the snakes come on watch, so he always 
had one gang under him, in his way, and t’other gang having a 
circus over him, and if he got up to hunt a new place, the 
spiders would take a chance at him as he crossed over. He 
said if he ever got out, this time, he wouldn’t ever be a prisoner 
again, not for a salary. 

Well, by the end of three weeks, everything was in pretty 
good shape. The shirt was sent in early, in a pie, and every 
time a rat bit Jim he would get up and write a little in his 



898 TSE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


journal whilst the ink was &esh; the pens was made, the in> 
Bcriptions and so on was all carved on the grindstone j the bed- 
leg was sawed in two, and we had et up the sawdust, and it 
give us a most amazing stomach-ache. We reckoned we was 
all going to die, but didn’t. It was the most undigestible saw¬ 
dust I ever see ; and Tom said the same. But as I was saying. 



we’d got all the work done, now, at last; and we was all pretty 
much fagged out, too, but mainly Jim. The old man had 
wrote a couple of times to the plantation below Orleans to come 
and get their runaway nigger, but hadn’t got no answer, because 
there wam’t no such plantation j so he allowed he would ad¬ 
vertise Jim in the St. Louis and New Orleans papers; and 
when he mentioned the St. Louis ones, it give me the cold 



THE STRAW DUMMY. 


S»0 


shivers, and I see we hadn’t no time to lose. So Tom said, 
DOW for the nonnamous letters. 

“ What’s them ? ” I sajs. 

“ Warnings to the people that something is up. Sometimes 
it’s done one way, sometimes another. But there’s always 
somebody spying around, that gives notice to the governor of 
the castle. When Louis XVI. was going to light out of the 
Tooleries, a servant girl done it. It’s a very good way, and so 
is the nonnamous letters. We’ll use them both. And it’s 
usual for the prisoner’s mother to change clothes with him, and 
she stays in, and he slides out in her clothes. We’ll do that 
too.” 

“ But looky here, Tom, what do we want to warn anybody 
for, that’s something’s up ? Let them find it out for themselves 
—it’s their look-out.” 

“ Yes, I know j but you can’t depend on them. It’s the 
way they’ve acted from the very start—left us to do everything. 
They’re so confiding and mullet-headed they don’t take notice 
, of nothing at all. So if we don’t give them notice, there won’t 
be nobody nor nothing to interfere with us, and so after all oui 
hard work and trouble this escape ’ll go off perfectly flat: won’t 
amount to nothing—won’t be nothing to it.” 

Well, as for me, Tom, that’s the way I’d like.” 

“ Shucks,” he says, and looked disgusted. So I says: 

“ But I ain’t going to make no complaint. Anyway that 

suits you suits me. WTiat you going to do about the servant- 
girl?” 

“ You 11 be her. You slide in, in the middle of the night, 
and hook that yaller girl’s frock.” , 

Why, Tom, that’ll make trouble next morning; because 
of course she prob’bly hain’t got any but that one.” 

I know; but you don’t want it but fifteen minutes, to 
carry the nonnamous letter and shove it under the front door.” 



400 THE ABVENTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ All right, then, I’ll do it; but I could carry it just 
tiandy in my own togs.” 

“ You wouldn’t look like a servant-girl, th&riy would you ? ” 

“ No, but there won’t be nobody to see what I look like, 
anyway.''' 

“ That ain’t got nothing to do with it. The thing for us 
to do, is just to do our duty, and not worry about whether any¬ 
body sees us do it or not. Hain’t you got no principle at all ? ” 

“ All right, I ain’t saying nothing; I’m the servant-girl. 
Who’s Jim’s mother? ” 

“ I’m his mother. I’ll hook a gown from Aunt Sally.” 
r “ Well, then, you’ll have to stay in the cabin when me and 
'^iiiffideaves.” 

• “Not much. I’ll stuff Jim’s clothes full of straw and lay 
it on his bed to represent his mother in disguise, and Jim ’ll 
take the nigger woman’s go\vn off of me and wear it, and we’ll 
all evade together. When a prisoner of style escapes, it’s called 
an evasion. It’s always called so when a king escapes, f’rinstance. 

■ And the same with a king’s son ; it don’t make no difference 
whether he’s a natural one or an unnatural one.” 

So Tom he wrote the nonnamous letter, and I smouched 

• ^ 

the yaller w^tfdh’g frock, that night, and put it on, and shoved 
it under the front door, the way Tom told int to. It said: 

Beicarc* Trouble U hrevcxng. Keep a sharp Upok^out, Unknown Friend* 

Next night we stuck a picture which Tom drawed in blood, 
of a skull and crossbones, on the front door; and next night 
another one of a coffin, on the back door. I never see a family 
i% such a sweat. They couldn’t a been worse scared if the 
place had a been full of ghosts laying for them behind every¬ 
thing and under the beds and shivering through the air. If a 
door banged, Aunt Sally she jumped, and said “ ouch ! ” if any¬ 
thing fell, she jumped, and said “ ouch ! ” if you happened U 



TJIE STRAW DUMMY. 


401 


touch her, when she warn’t noticing, she done the same; she 
couldn’t face noway and be satisfied, because she allowed there 
was something behind her every time—so she was always a 
whirling around, sudden, and saying “ ouch,” and before she’d 
get two-thirds around, she’d whirl back again, and say it again; 



TROUBLE 18 BREWING. 


a^d she was afraid to go to bed, but she dasn’t set up. So tUh 

thmg was working very well, Tom said ; he said he never sde 

a t ’ g work more satisfactory. He said it showed it was done 
nght. 

So he said, now for th,e grand bulge ! So the very nest 

D O 




402 THE adventures OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


morning at the streak of dawn we got another letter ready, and 
was wondering what we better do with it, because we heard 
them say at supper they was going to have a nigger on watch 
at both doors all night. Tom he went down the lightning-rod 
to spy around; and the nigger at the back door was asleep, 
and he stuck it in the back of his neck and come back. This 
letter said: 

D(m't betray me, I niah to be your friend. There u a desprate gany of eut‘ 
throats from orer in the Ingean Territory going to eteal your runarcay nigger to- 
night, and they have been trying to scare you so as you will stay in the house 
and not bother them. 1 am one of the gang, hut have got religgion and wish to 
quit it and lead a honest l\fe again, and will betray the helish design. They 
will sneak down from northards, along the fence, at midnight exact, with a 
false key, arid go in the nigger's cabin to get him. 1 am to be off a piece and 
blow atin horn if I see any danger; hut stead of that, I will BA like a sheeq. 
yoon as they get in and not blow at all; then whilst they are getting his chains 
hose, you slip there and lock them in, and can kill them at your leasure. Don t 
do anything but just the nay 1 am telling you, if you do they will suspicion 
something and raise whnopjamboreehoo. I do not wish any reward but to knon 
] have done the right thing. 


Unknown Fbibnd 


CHAPTER XL.

was feeling pretty good, 
after breakfast, and 
took my canoe and 
went over the river a 
hshing, with a lunch, 
and had a good time, 
and took a look at the 
raft and found her all 
right, and got home late 
to supper, and found 
them in such a sweat 
and worry they didn’t 
know which end they 
was standing on, and 
made us go right ofl 
to bed the minute we 
was done supper, and 
wouldn’t tell us what 
the trouble was, and never let on a word about the new letter, 
but didn’t need to, because we knowed as much about it as any¬ 
body did, and as soon as we was half upstairs and her back 
was turned, we slid for the cellar cubboard and loaded up a good 
lunch and took it up to our room and went to bed, and got up 

B D 3 


nSHIMO. 



4U4 TllK ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


about half-past eleven, and Tom put on Aunt Sally’s dress 
that he stole and was going to start with the lunch, but says: 

“Where’s the butter? ” 

“ I laid out a hunk of it,” I says, “ on a piece of a com- 
{X)ne.” 

“ Well, you left it laid out, then—it ain’t here.” 

“ We can get along without it,” I says. 

“ We can get along with it, too,” he says ; “just you slide 
down cellar and fetch it. And then mosey right down the 
lightning-rod and come along. I’ll go and stuff the straw into 
Jim’s clothes to represent his mother in disguise, and be ready 
to ha like a sheep and shove soon as you get there.” 

So out he went, and down cellar went 1. The hunk of * 
butter, big as a person’s fist, was where I had left it, so I took 
up the slab of com-pone with it on, and blowed out my light, 
and started upstairs, very stealthy, and got up to the main 
floor all right, but here comes Aunt Sally with a candle, and I 
clapped the truck in my hat, and clapped my hat on my head, 
and the next second she see me; and she says: 

“ You been down cellar ? ” 

“ Yes’m.” 

“ What you been doing down there ? ” 

« Noth’n.” 

» Nothin I” 

“ No’m.” 

“Well, then, ^hat possessed you to go down there, this 
time of night ? ” 

“ I don’t know’m.” 

♦ 

“ You don’t know ? Don’t answer me that way, Tom, I 
want to know what you been doim,g down there ? ” 

“ I hain’t been doing a single thing. Aunt Sally, I hope to 
gracious if I have.” 

I reckoned she’d let me go, now, and as a generl thing she 



THE riOlLANCE COMMITTEE. 


4oa 

would ; but I e’pose there was so many strange things going on 
she was just in a sweat about every little thing that warn’t 
yard-stick straight; so she says, very decided : 

“You just march into that setting-room and stay there till 
I come. You been up to something you no business to, and I 
lay I’ll find out what it is before Tm done with yon.” 

So she went away as I opened the door and walked into the 



CVEBY 9ilE HAD A GUN. 

setting-room. My, but there wns a crowd there! Fifteen 
farmers, and every one of them had a gun. I was most power¬ 
ful sick, and slunk to a chair and set down. They was setting 
around, some of them talking a little, in a low voice, and all of 
them fidgety and uneasy, but trying to look like they wam’t; 
but I knowed they was, because they was always taking off 
their hats, and putting them on, and scratching their heads, 
and changing their seats, and fumbling with their buttons. 



406 THE ABVEHTVEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINR. 


I warn’t easj myself, but I didn’t take my hat off, all the 
same. 

I did wish Aunt Sally would come, and get done with me, 
and lick me, if she wanted to, and let me get away and tell 
Tom how we’d overdone this thing, and what a thundering 
hornet’s nest we’d got ourselves into, so we could stop fooling 
around, straight off, and clear out with Jim before these rips 
got out of patience and come for us. 

At last she come, and begun to ask me questions, but I 
eouldnH answer them straight, I didn’t know which end of me 
was up j because these men was in such a 6dget now, that some 
was wanting to start right now and lay for them desperadoes, 
and saying it wam’t but a few minutes to midnight; and 
others was trying to get them to hold on and wait for the 
sheep-signal; and here was aunty pegging away at the ques¬ 
tions, and me a shaking all over and ready to sink down in my 
tracks I was that scared ; and the place getting hotter and 
hotter, and the butter beginning to melt and run down my 
neck and behind my ears; and pretty soon, when one of them 
says, “ Fm for going and getting in the cabin firsts and right 
noWf and catching them when they come,” I most dropped; 
and a streak of butter come a trickling down my forehead, and 
Aunt Sally she see it, and turns white as a sheet, and says: 

“For the land’s sake what is the matter with the child!— 
he’s got the brain fever as shore as you’re bom, and they’re 
oozing out! ” 

And everybody runs to see, and she snatches off my hat, 
and out comes the bread, and what was left of the butter, and 
she grabbed me, and hugged me, and says: 

“Oh, what a turn you did give me! and how glad and 
grateful I am it ain’t no worse; for luck’s against us, and it 
never rains but it pours, and when I see that truck I thought 
we’d lost you, for I knowed by the colour and all, it was just 



A LIVELY RUN. 


407 


Uke your brains would be if— Dear, dear, whydn’t you tell 
me that was what you’d been down there for, I wouldn’t a cared. 
Now cler out to bed, and don’t lemme see no more of you till 

morning! ” 

I was upstairs in a second, and down the lightning-rod in 
another one, and shinning through the dark for the lean-to. I 
couldn’t hardly get my words out, I was so anxious; but I 
told Tom as quick as I could, we must jump for it, now, and 
not a minute to lose—the house full of men, yonder, with 

guns! 

His eyes just blazed ; and he says: 

« No!—is that so ? Am’i it bully ! Why, Huck, if it was 
to do over again, I bet I could fetch two hundred 1 If we could 
put it off till-” 

“ Hurry ! hurry ! ” I says. “ WTiere’s Jim ? ” 

“ Right at your elbow; if you reach out your arm you can 
touch him. He’s dressed, and everything’s ready. Now we’ll 
slide out and give the sheep-signal.” 

But then we heard the tramp of men, coming to the door, 
and heard them begin to fumble with the padlock ; and heard 
a man say: 

“ I told you we’d be too soon j they haven’t come—the 
door is locked. Here, I’ll lock some of you into the cabin and 
you lay for ’em in the dark and kill ’em when they come; and 
the rest scatter around a piece, and listen if you can hear ’em 
coming.” 

So in they come, but couldn’t see us in the dark, and most 
trod on us whilst we was hustling to get under the bed. But 
we got under all right, and out through the hole, swift but 
soft—Jim first, me next, and Tom last, which was according to 
Tom’s orders. Now we was in the lean-to, and heard trampings 
close by outside. So we crept to the door, and Tom stopped 
us there and put his eye to the crack, but couldn’t make ou^ 



408 THE ADVENTURES! OF TJh'CKLERFRRY FINN. 


nothing, it was so dark; and whispered and said he would listen 
for the steps to get further, and when he nudged us Jim must 
glide out first, and him last. So he set his ear to the crack 
and listened, and listened, and listened, and the steps a scraping 
around, out there, all the time; and at last he nudged us, and 



TOM CAUGHT ON A 6PLINTEB. 


we slid out, and stooped down, not breathing, and not making 
the least noise, and slipped stealthy towards the^ence, in Injun 
file, and got to it, all right, and me and Jim over it; but Tom’s 
britches catched fast on a splinter on the top rail, and then he 
hear the steps coming, so he had to pull loose, which snapped 



A LIVELY RUN. 


409 

the splinter and made a noise ; and as he dropped in our trackf- 
and started, somebody sings out; 

“ Who’s that ? Answer, or I’ll shoot! ” 

But we didn’t answer; we just unfurled our heeln and 
shoved. Then there was a rush, and a hang., bang, bang ! and 
the bullets fairly whizzed around us! We heard them sing 
out: 

“ Here they are I They’ve broke for the river ! after ’em, 
boys I And turn loose the dogs! ” 

So here they come, full tilt. We could hear them, because 
they wore boots, and yelled, but we didn’t wear no hoots, and 
didn’t yell. We was in the path to the mill; and wlnm they 
got pretty close on to us, we dodged into tlie hush and let them 
go by, and then dropped in behind them. They’d had all the 
dogs shut up, 80 they wouldn’t scare off the robbers ; hut by 
this time somebody had let them loose, and here tlmy come, 
making pow-wow enough for a million ; but they was our dogs ; 
so we stopped in our tracks till they catched up; and when 
they see it warn’t nobody but us, and no excitement to otfer 
them, they only just said howdy, and tore right aliead towards 
the shouting and clattering ; and then we up steam again and 
whizzed along after them till we was nearly to the mill, and 
then struck up through the bush to where my canoe was tied, 
and hopped in and pulled for dear life towards the middle of 
the river, but didn’t make no more noise than we was obleeged 
In* Then we struck out, easy and comfortable, for the island 
w ere my raft was; and we could hear them yelling and bark¬ 
ing at each other all up and down the bank, till we was so far 

away the sounds got dim and died out. And when we stepped 
oa to the raft^ I says : 

^ Now, old Jim, you’re a free man again, and I bet you 
H'on’t ever be a slave no more." 

En a mighty good job it wuz, too, Huck. U ’uz planned 


410 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 

beautiful, en it ’uz done beautiful; en dey ain’t nobody kin git 
up a plan dat’s mo’ mixed-up en splendid den what dat one 
wuz.” 

We was all as glad as we could be, but Tom was the glad¬ 
dest of all, because he had a bullet in the calf of his leg. 

\\’’hen me and Jim heard that, we didn’t feel so brash as 
what we did before. It was hurting him considerble, and 
bleeding j so we laid him in the wigwam and tore up one of 
the duke’s shirts for to bandage him, but he says: 

“ Gimme the rags, I can do it myself. Don’t stop, now j 
don’t fool around here, and the evasion booming along so hand¬ 
some ; man the sweeps, and set her loose ! Boys, we done it 
elegant!—’deed we did. I wish we'd a had the handling of 
Louis XVI., there wouldn’t a been no ‘ Son of Saint Louis, 
ascend to heaven ! ’ wrote down in hie biography: no, sir, we’d 
a whooped him over the border —that’s what we’d a done with 
him —and done it just as slick as nothing at all, too. Man the 
sweeps—man the sweeps! ” 

But me and Jim was consulting—and thinking. And after 
we’d thought a minute, I says: 

“ Say, it Jim.” 

So he says: 

“ Well, den, dis is de way it look to me, Huck. Ef it wuz 
him dat ’uz bein’ sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, 
would he say, ‘ Go on en save me, nemmine ’bout a doctor f’r 
to save dis one? ’ Is dat like Mars Tom Sawyer? Would he 
say dat? You. bet he wouldn’t! Welly den, is/im gwyne to 
say it ? No, sah—I doan’ budge a step out’n dis place, ’dout a 

doctor; not if it’s forty year! ” 

I knowed he was white inside, and I reckoned he’d say what 
he did say—so it was all right, now, and I told Tom I was 
agoing foi a doctor. He raised considerble row about it, but 
me and Jim stuck to it and wouldn’t budge; so he was foi 



411 


■ jm ADVISES A DOCTOR. 

crawling out and setting the raR loose himself; but we wouldn’t 
let him. Then he give us a piece of his mind—but it di 

no good. 

So when he sees me getting the canoe ready, be says: 

“ Well, then, if you’re bound to go, I’ll tell you the way to 



JIM AUV16EB A DOOTOB. 


do, when you get to the village. Shut the door, and blindfold 
the doctor tight and fast, and make him swear to be silent as 
the grave, and put a purse full of gold in his hand, and then take 
and lead him all around the back alleys and everywheres, in the 
dark, and then fetch him here in the canoe, in a roundabout 


412 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


way amoDgst the islards, and search him, and take his chalk 
away from him, and don’t give it back to him till you get him 
back to the village, or else he will chalk this raft so he can find 
it again. It’s the way they all do.” 

So I said I would, and left, and Jim was to hide in the 
woods when he see the doctor coming, till he was gone again. 








Tb 


THB DOCTOR. 

CHAPTER XLI.

doctor was an old man; 
u vtry nice, kind-look¬ 
ing old man, when I got 
him up. I told him me 
and my brother was over 
on Spanish Island hunting, 
yesterday afternoon, and 
camped on a piece of a raft 
found, and about mid¬ 
night he must a kicked his 
gun in his dreams, for it 
went off and shot him in 
the leg, and we wanted him 
to go over there and fix it 
and not say nothing about 
it, nor let anybody know, 
because we wanted to come 


home this evening, and surprise the folks. 

“ Who is your folks ? he says. 

“ The Phelpses, down yonder.” 

Oh, he says. And after a minute, he says: “ Mow’d you 
say be got shot ? ” 

“ He had a dream,” I says, « and it shot him.” 

“Singular dream,” he says. 


414 TUB ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


So he lit up his lantern, and got his saddle-bags, and we 
started. But when he see the canoe, he didn’t like the look of 
her—said she was big enough for one, but didn’t look pretty 
safe for two. I says; 

“ Oh, you needn’t be afeard, sir, she carried the three of 
us, easy enough.” 

“ What three ? ” 

“ \Miy, me and Sid, and— and—and the guns; that’s what 
I mean.” 

“ Oh,” he says. 

But he put his foot on the gunnel, and rocked her; and 
shook his head, and said he reckoned he’d look around for a 
bigger one. But they was all locked and chained; so he took 
my canoe, and said for me to wait till he come back, or I could 
hunt around further, or maybe I better go down home and get 
them ready for the surprise, if I wanted to. But I said I 
didn’t; so I told him just how to find the raft, and then he 
started. 

I struck an idea, pretty soon. I says to myself, spos’n he 
can’t fix that leg just in three shakes of a sheep’s tail, as the 
saying is ? spos’n it takes him three or four days? What are 
we going to do?—lay around there till he lets the cat out of 
the bag? No, sir, I know what I'll do. I’ll wait, and when 
he comes back, if he says he’s got to go anymore. I’ll get down 
there, too, if I swim; and we’ll take and tie him, and keep 
him, and shove out down the river ; and when Tom’s done with 
him, we’ll give him what it’s worth, or all we got, and then let 
him get ashore. 

So then I crept into a lumber 
next time I waked up the sun was 
shot out and went for the doctor’s 
gone away in the night, some tim 
yet. Well, thinks I, that looks powerful had for and HI 


pile to get some sleep; and 
away up over my head 1 I 
bouse, but they told me he d 
ft nr nfhpr. and warn’t back 



UNCLE SILAS. 


416 


dig out for the island, right off. So away I shoved, and turned 
the corner, and nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas’s 
stomach 1 He says : 

“ ^Tiy, Tom! Where you been, all this time, you rascal ? ” 
“/hain’t been nowheres,” I says, “only just hunting for 
the runaway nigger—me and Sid.” 



UNOLB 8ILA.B IM DANQBE. 


“ Why, where ever did you go ? ” he says. “ Your aunt’s 
been mighty aneasy,” 

«She needn’t,” I says, «because we was all right. We 
0 owed the men and the dogs^ but they outrun us, and we 



*16 THE ADVENTURES OF IIUCKLERERRY FINN. 


lost them ; but we thought we heard them on the water, so we 
got a canoe and took out after them, and crossed over but 
couldn’t find nothing of them ; so we cruised along up-shore 
till we got kind of tired and beat out; and tied up the canoe 
and went to sleep, and never waked up till about an hour ago, 
then we paddled over here to hear the news, and Sid’s at the 
post-office to see what he can hear, and Fm a branching out to 
get something to eat for us, and then we’re going home.” 

So then we went to the post-office to get “ Sid ”; but just 
as I suspicioned, he warn’t there; so the old man he got a letter 
- out of the office, and we waited a while longer but Sid didn’t 
come; so the old man said come along, let Sid foot it home, or 
canoe-it, when he got done fooling around—but we would ride. 
I couldn’t get him to let me stay and wait for Sid; and he said 
there wam’t no use in it, and I must come along, and let Aunt 
Sally see we was all right. 

When we got home. Aunt Sally was that glad to see me 
she laughed and cried both, and hugged me, and give me one 
of them lickings of hern that don’t amount to shucks, and said 
she’d serve Sid the same when he come. 

And the place was plumb full of farmers and farmers’wives, 
to dinner; and such another clack a body never heard. Old 
Mrs. Hotchkiss was the worst; her tongue was agoing all the 
time. She says: 

“ Well, Sister Phelps, Fve ransacked that-air cabin over an’ 
I b’lieve the nigger was crazy. I says so to Sister Dararell— 
didn’t I, Sister Damreli ?—s’l, he’s crazy, s’l—them’s the very 
words I said. You all beam me: he’s crazy, s’l; everything 
shows it, b’I. Look at that-air grindstone, s’l; want to tell 
me ’t anv crctur ’ts in his right mind ’s agoin’ to scrabble all 
them crazy things on to a grindstone, s’l ? Here sich ’n’ sich a 
person busted his heart; ’n’ here so ’n’ so pegged along for 
thirty-seven year, ’n’ all that—natcherl son o’ I^uissoinelxKj'A 



S2$T^ ltOTCn^2^.‘‘' ■ “ • ' 4lt 

^ I ^ ^ 

• .1 I I f . 

’n’ sich everlast’n rubbage. He’s plumb crazy, s’l; it’s what I 
says in the fust place, it’s what I says in the middle, ’n’ it’s 
what I says last ’n’ all the time—the nigger’s crazy—crazy’s 
Nebokoodneezer, b’I.” 

“ An’ look at that-air ladder made out’n rags, Sister Hotch¬ 
kiss,” says old Airs. Damrell, “ what in the name o’ goodness 
could he ever want of-” 

“The very words I was a-sayin* no longer ago th’n this 
minute to Sister Utterbaek, ’n' she’ll tell you so herself. Sh- 



OLD UBS. HOTCHKISS. 


Ghe, look at tha^air rag ladder, sh-she; ’n’ s’l, yes, look at it, 

81 what couW he a wanted of it, s’l? Sh-she, Sister Hotchkiss, 
sh-she-_” 

But how in the nation’d they ever git that grindstone in 
there, any-way ? V who dug that-air hole ? ’n’ who-” 

^ y veiy wordSj Brer Penrod I I was a-sayin’—pass tbat- 
^ ° m’la^es, won’t ye?—I was a-sayin’ to Sister 

o P* minute, how did they git that grindstone in 

®re, B . Without mind you—’thout help 1 Thar's 

E E 



4i8 THB ADVENTUBBS OB RUCKLEBERRT FINK 


wher* 'tis. Don’t tell me, s’l; there wuz help, s’l; ’n’ ther* 
vniz a 'plenty help, too, s’l; ther’s ben a dozen a-helpin’ that 
nigger, ’n’ I lay I’d skin every last nigger on this place, but Vd 

find out who done it, s’l; ’n’ moreover, s’l-” 

“ A dozen says you!— forty couldn’t a done everything 
that’s been done. Look at them case-knife saws and things, 
how tedious they’ve been made; look at that bed-leg sawed off 
with’m, a week’s work for six men; look at that nigger made 


out’n straw on the bed; and look at-” 

“ You may well say it. Brer Hightower! It’s jist as I was 
a-sayin’ to Brer Phelps, his own self. S’e, what do you think 
of it. Sister Hotchkiss, s’e ? think o’ what, Brer Phelps, s’l ? 
think o’ that bed-leg sawed off that a way, s’e ? thinh of it, 
s’l ? I lay it never sawed itself off, s’l—somebody sawed it, 
s’l; that’s my opinion, take it or leave it, it mayn’t be no 
’count, s’l, but sich as’t is, it’s my opinion, s’l, ’n* if anybody 
k’n start a better one, s’l, let him do it, s’l, that’s all. I says 


to Sister Dunlap, s’l-” 

« Why, dog my cats, they must a ben a house-full o’ niggers 
in there every night for four weeks, to a done all that work, Sister 
Phelps. Look at that shirt—every last inch of it kivered over 
with secret African writ’n done with blood ! Must a ben a raft 
uv’m at it right along, all the time, amost. Why, I’d give 
two dollars to have it read to me; ’n* as for the niggers that 


wrote it, I ’low I’d take ’n’ lash’m t’ll-” 

“People to kelp him, Brother Marples I Well, I reckon 
you’d think so, if you’d a been in this house for a while back. 
Why, they’ve stole everything they could lay their hands on 
and we a watching, all the time, mind you. They stole that 
shirt right off o’ the line ! and as for that sheet they made the 
rag ladder out of ther’ ain’t no telling how many times they 
did/rCt steal that j and flour, and candles, and candlesticks, and 
spoons, and the old warming-pan, and most a thousand things 



SISTEM HOTCHKISS. 


411 ) 


that I disremember, now, and my new calico dress; and me, 
and Silas, and my Sid and Tom on the constant watch clay aTid 
night, as I was a telling you, and not a one of us could catch 
hide nor hair, nor sight nor sound of them; and here at the 
last minute, lo and behold you, they slides right in under our 
noses, and fools us, and not only fools us but the Injun Terri¬ 
tory robbers too, and actuly gets away with that nigger, safe 
and sound, and that with sixteen men and twenty-two dogs 
right on their very heels at that very time t I tell you, it just 
bangs anything I ever heard of. Why, s^perits couldn’t a done 
better, and been no smarter. And I reckon they must a been 
sperits—because, you know our dogs, and ther’ ain’t no better ; 
well, them dogs never even got on the track of'm, once I You 
explain that to me, if you can !—any of you I ” 

“ Well, it does beat-” 

“ Laws alive, I never—” 

“ So help me, I wouldn’t a be-” 

“ floiwe-thieves as well as-” 

“ G-oodnessgracioussakes, I’d a ben afeard to live in sich 
a-” 

“ ’Fraid to live I —why, I was that scared I dasn’t hardly go 
to bed, or get up, or lay down, or set down, Sister Ridgeway. 
Why, they’d steal the very—why, goodness sakes, you can 
guess what kind of a fluster I was in by the time midnight come, 
last night. I hope to gracious if I wam’t afraid they’d steal 
some 0 the family 1 I was just to that pass, I didn’t have no 
reasoning faculties no more. It looks foolish enough, noWy in the 
day-time; but I says to myself, there’s my two poor boys asleep, 
way upstairs in that lonesome room, and I declare to goodness 
I was that uneasy’t I crep’ up there and locked ’em in ! I did. 
And anybody would. Because, you know, when you get scared, 
that way, and it keeps running on, and getting worse and worse, 
all the time, and your wits gets to addling, and you get to doing 

B B 2 


420 TEE ADVENTURES OF EUCKLEBERRT FINN. 


ail sorts o’ wild things, and by-and-by you think to yourself, 
spos’n I was a boy, and was away up there, and the door ain’t 

locked, and you-” She stopped, looking kind of wondering, 

and then she turned her head around slow, and when her eye 
lit on me—I got up and took a walk. 

Says I to myself, I can explain better how we come to not 
be in that room this morning, if I go out to one side and study 
over it a little. So I done it. But I dasn’t go fur, or she’d a 
sent for me. And when it was late in the day, the people all 
went, and then I come in and told her the noise and shooting 
waked up me and “ Sid,” and the door was locked, and we 
wanted to see the fun, so we went down the lightning-rod, and 
both of us got hurt a little, and we didn’t never want to try 
that no more. And then I went on and told her all what I 
told Uncle Silas before j and then she said she’d forgive ua, 
and maybe it was all right enough anyway, and about what a 
body might expect of boys, for all boys was a pretty hanun- 
scarum lot, as fur as she could see; and so, as long as no harm 
hadn’t come of it, she judged she better put in her time being 
grateful we was alive and well and she had us still, stead of 
frettirig over what was past and done. So then she kissed me, 
and patted me on the head, and dropped into a kind of a brown 
study ; and pretty soon jumps up, and says: 

“ Why, lawsamercy, it’s most night, and Sid not come yet 1 
What has become of that boy ? ” 

I see my chance ; so I skips up and says: 

“ I’ll run right up to town and get him,” I says. 

“No you won’t,” she says. “You’ll stay right wher’you 
are; one's enough to be lost at a time. If he ain’t here to 
supper, your uncle ’ll go.” 

Well, he wam’t there to supper; so right after supper 
uncle went. 

He come back about ten, a little bit uneasy j hadn’t run 



aunt sally in thouhlb. 


421 

across Tom’s track. Aunt Sally was a good deal uneasy; but 
Uncle Silas he said there warn’t no occasion to be- ^boys will be 
boys, he said, and you’ll see this one turn up in the morning, 
all sound and right. So she had to be satisfied. Rut she said 
she’d set up for him a while, anyway, and keep a light 
burning, so he could see it. 



AUNT 8ALLT TALKS TO HUOK. 


And then when I went up to bed she come up with me and 
fetched her candle, and tucked me in, and mothered me so 
good I felt mean, and like I couldn’t look her in the face ; and 
she set down on the bed and talked with me a long time, and 
said what a splendid boy Sid was, and didn’t seem to want to 
ever stop talking about him • and kept asking me every now 
and then, if I reckoned he could a got lost, or hurt, or maybe 



423 THE AEVEHTVRES OF HUCKLEBERMY FINN, 


drownded, and might be laying at this minute, somewheres, 
suffering or dead, and she not by him to help him, and so the 
tears would drip down, silent, and I would tell her that Sid was all 
right, and would be home in the morning, sure; and she would 
squeeze my hand, or maybe kiss me, and tell me to say it again, 
and keep on saying it, because it done her good, and she was in 
so much trouble. And when she was going away, she looked 
down in my eyes, so steady and gentle, and says: 

“The door ain’t going to be locked, Tom ; and there’s the 
window and the rod ; but you’ll be good, wonH you ? And you 
won’t go ? For my sake.” 

Laws knows I wanted to go, bad enough, to see about Tom, 
and was all intending to go; but after that, I wouldn’t a went. 


not for kingdoms. 

But she was on my mind, and Tom was on my mind; so I 
slept very restless. And twice I went down the rod, away in 
the night, and slipped around front, and see her setting there 
by her candle in the window with her eyes towards the road 
and the tears in them j and I wished I could do something for 


her, but I couldn’t, only to swear that I wouldn’t never do 
nothing to grieve her any more. And the third time, I waked 
up at dawn, and slid down, and she was there yet, and her candle 
was most out, and her old gray head was resting on her hand, 


and she was asleep. 




fl1 

(’w 



TOM SAWYEB WOUNDBD. 

CHAPTER XLII.

old man was up town 
^ again, before breakfast, 
but couldn’t get no 
track of Tom; and 
both of them set at 
the table, thinking, 
and not saying no¬ 
thing, and looking 
mournful, and their 
coflfee getting cold, 
and not eat anything. 
And by-and-by the old 
man says : 

“ Did I give you 
the letter ? ” 

“What letter? ” 

“ The one I got 
yesterday out of the 
post-office.” 


“ No, you didn’t give me no letter,” 

“ Well, I must a forgot it.” 

So he rummaged his pockets, and then went off somewheres 

where he had laid it down, and fetched it, and give it to her. 
She says: 



424 TUB ADVENTURES OF MUCELEBERRY FINN. 

“Wliy it’s from St. Pet ersburg—it’s from Sis.” 

r allowed another walk would do me good j but I couldn’t 
stir. But before she could break it open, she dropped it and 
run—for she see something. And so did I. It was Tom Saw¬ 
yer on a mattress j and that old doctor; and Jim, in hev calico 
dress, with his hands tied behind him ; and a lot of people. I 
hid the letter behind the first thing that come handy, and 
rushed. She flung herself at Tom, crying, and says; 

“ Oh, he’s dead, he’s dead, I know he’s dead ! ” 

And Tom he turned his head a little, and muttered some¬ 
thing or other, which showed he wam’t in his right mind; 
then she flung up her hands, and says: 

“He’s alive, thank God! And that’s enough!” and she 
snatched a kiss of him, and flew for the house to get the bed 
ready, and scattering orders right and left at the niggers and 
everybody else, as fast as her tongue could go, every jump of 
the way, 

I followed the men to see what they was going to do with 
Jim ; and the old doctor and uncle Silas followed after Tom 
into the' house. The men was very huffv, and some of them 
wanted to hang Jim, for an example to all the other niggers 
around there, so they wouldn't be trying to run away, like Jim 
done, and making such a raft of trouble, and keeping a whole 
family scared most to death for days and nights. But the 
others said, don’t do it, it wouldn’t answer at all, he ain’t oui 
nigger, and his owner would turn up and make us pay for him, 
sure. So that cooled them down a little, because the people 
that’s always the most anxious for to hang a nigger that hain’t 
done just right, is always the very ones that ain’t the most 
anxious to pay for him when they’ve got their satisfaction out 
of him. 

They cussed Jim considerble, though, and give him a cuff 
or two, side the head, once in a while, but Jim never said 



THE DOCTOR'S STORY. 


426 


Qothing, and he never let on to know me, and they took him 
to the same cabin, and put his own clothes on him, and chained 
him again, and not to no bed-leg, this time, but to a big staple 
drove into the bottom log, and chained his hands, too, and 
both legs, and said he wam’t to have nothing but bread and 
water to eat, after this, till his owner come or he was sold at 
auction, because he didn’t come in a certain length of time, 
and filled up our hole, and said a couple of farmers with guns 


must stand watch around about the cabin every night, and a 
bull-dog tied to the door in the day-time ; and about this time 
they was through with the job and was tapering off with a kind 
of generl good-bye cussing, and then the old doctor comes and 
takes a look, and says: 

Don t be no rougher on him than you're ohleeged to, 
because he ain’t a bad nigger. ^\Tien 1 got to where I found 
the hoy, I see I couldn’t cut the bullet out without some help, 
and he warn’t in no condition for me to leave, to go and get 
elp; and he got a little worse and a little worse, and after a 
ong time he went out of his head, and wouldn’t let me come 
amgh him, any more, and said if I chalked his raft he’d kill 
me, and no end of wild foolishness like that, and I see I couldn’t 
do anything at all with him; so I says, I got to have help, 
somehow; and the minute I says it, out crawls this niggerfrom 
somewheres, and says hell help, and he done it, too, and done 
ve^ we . Of course I judged he must be a runaway nigger, 
and there ^os/ and there I had to stick, right straight along 
^ the rest of the day, and all night. It was a fix, I tell youl 
I had a couple of patients with the chills, and of course I'd of 

maaJ y ^ I because the 

to stick I 

niffffe ^ daylight this morning ; and I never see a 

?g at was a better nuss or faithfuUer, and yet he was 


I 


426 THE AEVENTTJEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


resking his freedom to do it, and was all tired out, too, and I 
see plain enough he’d been worked main hard, lately. I liked 
the nigger for that; I tell you, gentlemen, a nigger like that 
is worth a thousand dollars—and kind treatment, too. I had 
everything I needed, and the boy was doing as well there as he 
would a done at home—better,maybe, because it was so quiet; 



Tiia DOCTOR SPEAKS FOB JIU. 


but there I was, with both of’m on my hands; and there 1 
had to stick, till about dawn this morning; then some men in 
a skiff come by, and as good luck would have it, the nigger 
was setting by the pallet with his head propped on his knees, 
Bound asleep ; so I motioned them in, quiet, and they slipped 
up on him and grabbed him and tied him before he knowed 







DOING JIM A GOOD TURN. 


427 


what he was about, and we never bad no trouble. And the boy 
being in a kind of a flighty sleep, too, we muffled the oars and 
hitched the raft on, and towed her over very nice and quiet, and 
the nigger never made the least row nor said a word, from the 
start. He ain’t no bad nigger, gentlemen ; that’s what I think 
about him.” 

Somebody says: 

“Well, it sounds very good, doctor, I’m obleeged to say.” 

Then the others softened up a little, too, and I was mighty 
thankful to that old doctor for doing Jim that good turn ; and 
I was glad it was according to my judgment of him, too; 
because I thought he had a good heart in him and was a good 
man, the first time I see him. Then they all agreed that Jim 
had acted very well, and was deserving to have some notice 
took of it, and reward. So every one of them promised, right 
out and hearty, that they wouldn’t cuss him no more. 

Then they come out and locked him up. I hoped they was 
going to say he could have one or two of the chains took off, 
because they was rotten heavy, or could have meat and greens 
with his bread and water, but they didn’t think of it, and I 
reckoned it wam’t best for me to ttiIt in, but I judged I'd get 
the doctor’s yam to Aunt Sally, somehow or other, as soon as 
Id got through the breakers that was laying just ahead of 
me. Explanations, I mean, of how I forgot to mention about 
Sid being shot, when I was telling how him and me put in that 
dratted night paddling around hunting the runaway nigger. 

But I had plenty time. Aunt Sally she stuck to the sick¬ 
room all day and all night; and every time I see Uncle Silas 
mooning around, I dodged him. 

Next monung I heard Tom was a good deal better, and 
they said Aunt Sally was gone to get a nap. So I slips to the 
sick-room, and if I found him awake I reckoned we could put 
'ip a yam for the femily that would wash. But he was sleeping, 



428 THE ADrE:STURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIKN. 

and sleeping very peaceful, too; and pale, not fire-faced the 
way he was when he come. So I set down and laid for him to 
wake. In about a half an hour, Aunt Sally comes gliding in, % 
and there I was, up a stump again ! She motioned me to be 
still, and set down by me, and begun to whisper, and said we 
could all be joyful now, because all the symptoms was first rate, 
and he’d been sleeping like that for ever so long, and looking 
better and peacefuller all the time, and ten to one he’d wake 
up in his right mind. 

So we set there watching, and by-and-by he stirs a bit, and 
opened his eyes very natural, and takes a look, and says: 

“ Hello, why I’m at ^ome How’s that? ^Tiere’s the raft ? ” 

“It’s all right,” I says. 

“And JimV' 

“ The same,” I says, but couldn’t say it pretty brash. But 
he never noticed, but says : 

“ Good! Splendid! Now we’re all right and safe I Bid 
you tell aunty ? ” 

I was going to say yes ; but she chipped in and says: 

“ About what, Sid ? ” 

“ Why, about the way the whole thing was done.” 

“ What whole thing ? ” 

“ Why, the whole thing. There ain’t but one; how we set 
the runaway nigger free—me and Tom.” 

“ Good land ! Set the run— What is the child talking 
about! Bear, dear, out of his head again I ” 

“ iVb, I ain’t out of my head ; I know all what I’m talking 
about. We did set him free—me and Tom. We laid out to do it, 
and we done it. And we done it elegant, too.” He’d got a start, 
and she never checked him up, just set and stared and stared, 
and let him clip along, and I see it warn’t no use for me to put 
in. “ Why, Aunty, it cost us a power of work—weeks of it 
hours and hours, every night, whilst you was all asleep. And 


TOM CONFESSES. 


429 


we had to steal candles, and the sheet, and the shirt, and your 
dress, and spoons, and tin plates, and case-knives, and the 
warming-pan, and the grindstone, and flour, and just no end of 
things, and you can’t think what work it was to make the 
saws, and pens, and inscriptions, and one thing or another, and 
you can’t think half the fun it was. And we bad to make up 
the pictures of coflBns and things, and nonnamous letters from 
the robbers, and get up and down the lightning-rod, and dig 
the hole into the cabin, and make the rope-ladder and send it 
in cooked up in a pie, and send in spoons and things to work 

with, in your apron pocket ”- 

“ Mercy sakes! ” 

-“ and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so 

on, for company for Jim; and then you kept Tom liere so long 
with the butter in his hat that you come near spiling the whole 
business, because the men come before we was out of the cal)in, 
and we had to rush, and they heard us and let drive at us, and 
I got my share, and we dodged out of the path and let them 
go by, and when the dogs come they warn’t interested in us, 
but went for the most noise, and we got our canoe, and made 
for the raft, and was all safe, and Jim was a free man, and we 
done it all by ourselves, and waanH it bully, Aunty ! ” 

Well, I never heard the likes of it in all my bom days! 
So it was you, you Uttle rapscallions, that’s been making all this 
trouble, and turned everybody’s wits clean inside out and scared 
tw all most to death. IVe as good a notion as ever I had in my 
hfe, to t^e it out o’ you this very minute. To think, here I’ve 
een, night after night, a—you just get well once, you young 
scainp, and I lay HI tan the Old Harry out o’ both o’ ye ! ” 

But Tom, he was so proud and joyful, he just couldm.*t hold 
^ tongue just wetit it—she a-chipping in, and spit- 

S e ^nng, and both of them going it at once, like a cat- 
convention; and she says : 


430 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


“ Well^ you get all the enjoyment you can out of it 
now, for mind I tell you if I catch you meddling with him 
again-” 

“ Meddling with who ? ” Tom says, dropping his smile, and " 
looking surprised. 

With who f Why, the runaway nigger, of course. Who’d 
you reckon ? ” 



I 


TOM HOSE BQUAHB UP IK BED. 

Tom looks at me very grave, and says : 

» Tom, didn’t you just tell me he was all right ? Hasn’t he 

got away ? ” 

Him ? ” says Aunt Sally; «the runaway nigger ? ^eed 
he hasn’t. They’ve got him back, safe and sound, and he s in 
that cabin again, on bread and water, and loaded down with 
chains, till he’s claimed or sold I ” 



AVNT POLLY ARRIVES. 


481 


Tom rose square up in bed, with his eye hot, and his nostrils 
opening and shutting like gills, and sings out to me: 

“ They hain’t no right to shut him up ! Shove ! —and don’t 
you lose a minute. Turn him loose ! he ain’t no slave ; he’s as 
free as any cretur that walks this earth ! ” 

“ ^^^lat does the child mean ? ” 

“ I mean every word I sai/, Aunt Sally, and if somebody don’t 
go, m go. I’ve knowed him all his life, and so has Tom, there. 
Old Miss Watson died two months ago, and she was ashamed 
she ever was going to sell him down the river, and said so; 
and she set him free in her will.” 

“ Then what on earth did you, want to set him free for, 
seeing he was already free ? ” 

“ Well, that is a question, I must say; and just like 
women! ^Vhy, I wanted the adventure of it; and I’d 
a waded neck-deep in blood to—goodness alive—AuKT 
Polly!” 

If she wam’t standing right there, just inside the door, look¬ 
ing as sweet and contented as an angel half-full of pie, I wish 
I may never! 

Aunt Sally jumped for her, and most hugged the head off 

of her, and cried over her, and I found a good enough place for 

me under the bed, for it was getting pretty sultry for seemed 

to me. And I peeped out, and in a Uttle while Tom’s Aunt Polly 

s ook herself loose and stood there looking across at Tom over 

her spectacles-kind of grinding him into the earth, you know 
And then she says: 

away—I would if I was you, 

«n, deary me 1 says Aunt Sally; “ ia he changed so ? 
^y, that am t Tom it’s Sid; Tom’s—Tom’s—why, where is 
lomj He was here a minute ago.” 

You mean where a Huck Finn —that’s what you mean! I 




432 THE ABVENTUEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINIV. 


reckon I hain’t raised such a scamp as my Tom all these ye^s, 
not to know him when I see him. That would be a pretty 
howdy-do. Come out from under that bed, Huck Finn.” 

So I done it. But not feeling brash. 

Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-upest looking persons 
I ever see; except one, and that was Uncle Silas, when he 
come in, and they told it all to him. It kind of made him 
drunk, as you may say, and he didn’t know nothing at all the 
rest of the day, and preached a prayer-meeting sermon that 
night that give him a rattling ruputation, because the oldest 
man in the world couldn’t a understood it. So Tom’s Aunt 
Polly, she told all about who I was, and what; and I had to up 
and tell how I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps 
took me for Tom Sawyer—she chipped in and says, “ Oh, go on 
and call me Aunt Sally, I’m used to it, now, and ’tain’t no need 
to change ”—that when Aunt Sally took me for Tom Sawyer, I 
had to stand it—there wam’t no other way, and I knowed he 
wouldn’t mind, because it would be nuts for him, being a 
mystery, and he’d make an adventure out of it and be perfectly 
satisfied. And so it turned out, and he let on to be Sid, and 
made things as soft as he could for me. 

And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss 
Watson setting Jim free in her will; and so, sure enough, Tom 
Sawyer bad gone and took all that trouble and bother to set a 
free nigger free! and I couldn’t ever understand, before, until 
that minute and that talk, how he could help a body set a 
nigger free, with his bringing-up. 

Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aimt Sally wrote to 
her that Tom and Sid had come, all right and safe, she says to 
herself: 

“Look at that, now! I might have expected it, letting 
him go off that way without anybody to watch him. So now I 
got to go and trapse all the way down the river, eleven hundred 



«BAND OVT THEH LETTERS." 


439 


mile, and find out what that creetur’a up to, this time ; as long 
as I couldn’t seem to get any answer out of you about it,” 
"Why, I never heard nothing from you,” says Aunt Sally. 

« Well, I wonder I Why, I wrote to yon twice, to ask you 
what you could mean by Sid being here.” 

" Well, I never got ’em, Sis.” 



*■ HAND OUT THNII LUTTEBa" 


Aunt Polly, she turns around slow and severe, and says: 

“You, Tom I” 

“ Well —wluit ? ” he says, kind of pettish. 

“ Don’t you what me, you impudent thing—hand ont them 
letters.” 

“ What letters ? ” 


434 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 

** Them letters. I be bound, if I have to take aholt of vou 

rii—” 

“ They’re in the trunk. There, now. And they’re just the 
same as they was when I got them out of the office. I hain’t 
looked into them, I hain’t touched them. But I knowed 
they’d make trouble, and I thought if you wam’t in no hurry, 
I’d-” 

“Well, you do need skinning, there ain’t no mistake about 
it. And I wrote another one to tell you I was coming; and I 
s’pose he-” 

“ No, it come yesterday; I hain’t read it yet, but i^$ all 
right, I’ve got that one.” 

I wanted to offer to bet two dollars she hadn’t, but I reckoned 
maybe it was j ast as safe to not to. So I never said nothing. 





CHAPTER THE LAST.

w 


first 


time I catchefd 



Tom, private, I asked 

him what was his idea, 

time of the evasion ? 

—what it was he’d 

planned to do if the 

evasion worked all 

right and he managed 

to set a nigger free 

that was already free 

before ? And he said, 

what he had planned 

in his head, from the 

start, if we got Jim 

out all safe, was for 

us to run him down 

* 

the river, on the raft, 
and have adventures 
plumb to the mouth 
of the river, and then 


tell him about his 
being free, and take him back up home on a steamboat, in 
style, and pay him for his lost time, and write word ahead and 





4i}0 TME ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, 


get out all the niggers around, and have them waltz him into 
town with a torchlight procession and a brass band, and then 
he would be a hero, and so would we. But I reckoned it was 
about as well the way it was. 

We had Jim out of the chains in no time, and when Aunt Polly 
and Uncle Silas and Aunt Sally found out how good he helped 
the doctor nurse Tom, they made a heap of fuss over him, and 
fixed him up prime, and give him all he wanted to eat, and a 
good time, and nothing to do. And we had him up to the 



TOMS LIBERALITT. 


sick-room; and had a high talk; and Tom give Jim forty 
dollars for being prisoner for us so patient, and doing it up so 
good, and Jim was pleased moat to death, and busted out, and 
says: 

“ Dahy now, Huck, what I tell you ? -what I tell you up 



PAYING THE CAPTIVE. 


437 

dah on Jackson islan’ ? I tole you I got a hairy breas’, en 
what’s de sign un it; en I tole you I ben rich wunst, en gwineter 
to be rich agin; en it’s come true; en heah she is ! Dahy 
now ! doan* talk to me—signs is eigna, mine I tell you ; en I 
knowed jis* ’s well ’at I ’uz gwineter be rich agin as I’s a 
stannin’ heah dis minute! ” 

And then Tom he talked along, and talked along, and says, 
le’s all three slide out of here, one of these nights, and get an 
outfit, and go for howling adventures amongst the Injuns, over 
in the Territory, for a couple of weeks or so; and I says, all 
right, that suits me, but I ain’t got no money for to buy the 
outfit, and I reckon I couldn’t get none from home, because it’s 
likely pap’s been back before now, and got it all away from 
Judge Thatcher and drunk it up. 

“No he hain’t,” Tom says; “it’s all there, yet—six 
thousand dollars and more; and your pap hain’t ever been 
back since. Hadn’t when I come away, anyhow.” 

Jim says, kind of solemn : 

“He ain’t a cornin’ back no mo’, Huck.” 

I says: 

“ Why, Jim ? ” 

“ Nemmine why, Huck—but he ain’t coinin’ back no mo’.” 

But I kept at him ; so at last he says: 

“ Doan’ you ’member de house dat was fioat’n down de river, 
en dey wuz a man in dah, kivered up, en I went in en un- 
kivered him and didn’ let you come ib ? Well, den, you k’n git 
yo’ money when you wants it; kase dat wuz him.” 

Tom 8 most well, now, and got his bullet around his neck 
on a watch-guard for a watch, and is always seeing what time it 
is, and so there ain’t nothing more to write about, and I am rotten 
glad of it, because if I’d a knowed what a trouble it was to 
make a book I wouldn’t a tackled it and ain’t agoing to no more. 



458 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. 


But I reckon I got to light out for the Territory ahead of the 
rest, because Aunt Sally she’s going to adopt me aud sivilise 
me, and I can’t stand it. I been there before. 



TItE END. YOUBS TBCLT, BUCK FINN. 


TRINTED DT 

tfPOTTlftWOODE AND CO. DTD.» COLCKEITEB 
LONDON .iND ETON 


























ALPHABETICAL CATALOGUE OF BOOKS 

IN 

GENERAL LITERATURE AND FICTION 

PUBLISHED BY 

ChATTO & WiNDUS 

III St. AIaf^tin’s Lanh, Charing Cross 


London 


London, W.C. 


T<Uf'hov( No, 
3524 Ctniral 


ADAMS (W^ DAVENPORT).— 

A Dictionary of the Drama: A 

Guide 10 the Plays. Playwrights. Flayers, 
and Playhouses o( the United Kingdom 
and America, from the Karliest Times to 
the Present. Vol. I.(AtoGK DemySvo, 
cloth. loj. Od, net'-Vol. 11.. complcUng 
the Work, is in preparation. 


KEMPIS (THOMAS)*—Of the 

Imitation of Christ* as translated from 
the Latin by Richard Whvtpord in 
1556 ; re-edited into modern English by 
Wilfrid Raynau O S.B. With Illustra¬ 
tions in colour and line by W. RvssKt.L 
Flint. Large crown Rvo, cloth. 7^. <\i. 
net: EDITION DR LUXR, with 4 additional 
Coloured PUtes, sm.all 4to. printed on 
pure rag paper, parchment, 154. net: 
picskln with clasps, 351. net. 


ALDEN (W* L*)* — Drewitrs 

Dream. Crown Fvo. cloth, ts. 


ALLEN (GRANT), Books by* 

Po6t»Prandlal Philosophy* Crown 
8vo, art linen. 32. (ni. 

Crown 8vo cloth. 6r/. each : post S?o, 
illustrated boards, sj. each. 
Babylon* With is Illustrations. 

Btran^e Stories* 

The Beckoning Hand. 

For Ualmie's Sake* 

Phlllstia* I !n all Shades. 
The Devira Dio. | Tents of Shorn. 
This Mortal Coil. 

Dnmaresq's Daughter, 
under Sealed Orders. 

The Duchess of Powysland* 
Blood Royal. I The Great Taboo. 
Wan Great's Masterpiece. 

The Scallywag. With 24 lllustr.'itions. 
At Market Value. 

The Tents of Shorn. Popular 
Editio.v, medium Svo. (>*/. 

Babylon. Che.\p Edition, post Svo 
cloth, u. net. 

ANDERSON(MARY).-Othello’s 

Occupstion* Crown Kvo, cloth. o<f. 

ANTROBUS (C. L*), Novels by. 

Crown Fvo, cloth. 35. 6 d. e.ich. 

C^i'ner, | Wlldersmoor 
The Brine of Plnvarra, 

The Stone Ezel* Crown 8vo, Cl.vth.6x, 


ALEX ANDER (Mrs.)* Novels by, 

Crown bvo, cloth 3 s. Uf. each ; 

picture boards, ar. each. 

Valerie’e Fate. | Mona'e Choice* 
A Life Interest*! Woman's Wit* 
Blind Fate* 


Crown bvo, cJi»th, 35. each. 

The Cost of her Pride* 

A Golden Autumn* 

Barbara, Lady's Maid A Peeress. 
Mrs. Crlohton*B Creditor. 

A Missing Hero* 

A Fight with Fate* 

The Step-mother* 


ALMAZ (E. F.).—Copper under 

the Gold. Crown Fvo. cUah, 3x. 6./* ; 
CiiKAF Kditidn. paper cov<f, u. net. 


AMERICAN FARMER, LET¬ 
TERS PROM AN. By J, H- St. Joii.v 
CRtv^coKl R. with iVcfatory N^ole by W. 
F. TRRNT, and hitnxluction by LuDWJU 
Llwisohx. Demv 8vo, c*Mh,6f net. 


APPLETON iG. W*l, Novels by. 

Rash Conoluslons* Cr.8vo, cl.,35.tt/. 
The Lady in Babies* Cr. tvvo, cl., tx. 


ARNOLD lE. L.)» Stories by. 
The Wonderful Adventures of 
Phra the Phceniolan. Crown Svr* 
cloth, wui» 12 lllusts. l>v H. M. Fa<5Ki\ 
3x. td.: poM Rvo. boards, is. 

The Constable of 6t* Nicholas. 
With a FronliNpJCCc. Cjowa Svo, (.lolh, 
3 j. A/. : picinrc cloth, flat bnck. is. 


ART and LETTERS LIBRARY 

<Thc)« Large crown 8vo. Each volume 
with S Coloured Pi.*\te^,and 24 in Half¬ 
tone. Buckr.im. 72. o./. net per vol. 
Edition dk Lvxi-; vmall 4I0. mostJy with 
5 addilinnal Plates, printed on pure rag 
paper, parchm<*Dl. i^r. net per vol* 

Btorles of tho Italian Artists 
from Vasari* ColUcted .ind arranged 
bv E. L, SKhl.lvV, 

Artists of the Italian Renals* 
sanco: their Stones .is set fonli by 
Vasari,I'ido'fi.Lanzi,and the Chroniclers, 
Collected and arranged by E. L. SuBLKY. 

Stories of the Fleisish and Dutch 
Artists, unm live lime of the V.an 
hycks to the End of the Seventeenth 
Century, drawn from Contemporary 
Records* Collected and arranged by 
Victor Ut«YNoi.Ds, 


C 3 «ol 











CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


ART & LETTURS LIBRARY — con(d. 
Stories of the English Artists, 

from Van D>xk to Turner (1600-1851). 
Collected ai d anranRed by Randall 
Davies and Cecil Hunt. 

Stories of the French Artists, 
from Clouet to Ddacroix. Collected and 
arranged by P. M. Turner andC. H. 
Collins Baker. 

Stories of the Spanish Artists 

until Goya. By f-Uis Carrbno. Edited 
bv Edward Hutton. 

Stories of the German Artists. 
Collected and arranged dv Prof. Ur. 
H AN*^ W. S' I NO HR. *[ P^tpa 

The Little Plowersof S.Franclsof 

Assisi* Traus. by Prof. T.W. ARNOLD, 

Carge crown 8vo. cloth, 7s, (ui. net c.ach \ 
parchment, rot. hd net each. 
V/omen of Florence* By Prof, isi- 
DORo DKL Lungo. iranslatcd by Mary 
G, SrKEGMANN. With Introduction by 
Dr. Guido BlAOt. 2 Coloured Plates and 
24in Half-tone. 

The Master of Game: The Oldest 
Kngli h Hcokr>fi Hunting. By Edward. 
'^icond Duke Df York, ^ited by \V. A. 
and F, BAlLLJE-GROlDtAN. With Intro, 
duction by THEODORE ROOSEVELT, 
Photogravure Frontispiece, and 23 fu?U 
page Illustrations after Illuminations. 

A RTE MUS WARD^S Works* 

Clown 8VO, cloth, with i'orlrail, ^s. 6d.. 
post 8vc* illustrated ho.nrd^, 2t. 

ARTIST (The Mind of the): 

Thoughts and Savings of Artists on their 
Art. CcElected and arranged by Mrs. 
Lu’Rh.NCB BiNYON. With 8 ful[*page 
Plates. Small crown 8 vo. cloth.3?,6d.net. 

As’hTON (JOHN).—Social Life 

In the Re]g:n of Queen Anne. With 
85 Illustration^. Crown Hvo, cloth, 35.6d. 

A uousfir^ E (5alnt), The Con- 

fesiions of. Translated by Dr. E. 0 . 
Husky. P>dited by Ti mplk Scon, with 
an Introduction by Mrs. Meynell. With 
II Plates in four colours and 1 In four 
colours and g<ild, by Maxw'ell Arm- 
held. T.arge cr, 8vo, cloth. 7^, net. 
Also an Kuii lON DE Luxh. cr. 4to, pure 
ragpapcr.with the plate.smtd..parchment, 
?5f. net: pigskin with cl.asns 25^. net. 


AUSTEN (J ANEi, The Works of: 

Tlic pretty St. Martin's Illustratkd 
Edition, m Ten Volumes, e.ich con- 
triining Ten Illustrations in C<*loiir 
by A. Wat, LIS Mli.ts* WMh Notes by 
R. Hrimi.kv Johnson. P«^t 8vo, cloth. 
is.f>d. net per vol. The Novels are 
arranged In the folloi^nng order. Vob. I. 
and II.. PRIDE AND PREJUDICE; 
VoN. III. and IV., SENSE AND SKNSt- 
BIIJTY; Vol. V., NOKTHAXGER 
ABBEY: VoL VI., PERSUASION: 
Vols. VII. and VIII., EMMA : Vols. iX. 
and X., MANSFIELD PARK. 


AUTHORS for the POCKET, 

Mostly compiled by A. H. Hyatt. i6mo, 
cloth, is. net c^ch ; leather, 3j. net cac^ 

The Pocket R. L. S. 

The Pocket Thackeray. 

The Pocket Charles Dickens. 
The Pocket RlcbaM Jefferies. 
The Pocket George MacDonald. 
The Pocket Emerson. 

The Pocket Thomas Hardy. 

The Pocket George Eliot. 

The Pocket Charles Kingsley. 
The Pocket Ruskia. 

The Pocket Lord Beaconsfield. 
The Flower of the Hind. 

AYSCOCiQH (JOHN);—Outsiders 

—and In. Crown Sto, cloth, 6j. 

BACTERIA, Yeast Funzl, and 

Allied Speclej, A Synopsis of* By 
W, B. Grove, H.A. With 87 Illustrations. 
Crown 8 VO, cloth. %i. M- 

BALLADSand UYRICSof LOVE, 

sheeted from Percy's ‘Rdiqucs.’ Edited 
with an Introduction by F. SlDGWlcK. 
With 10 Plates in Colour after Byam 
Shaw, R.I. Large leap. 4to, cloth, Or. 
rot. 

Legendary Ballads, selected from 
Percy’s • Reliques. Edited with an 
Introduction by F. SiOGWiCK. With 10 
Plates in Colour after Byam Shaw, R.I. 
Large fcap* 4to. cloth, 6,t. net. 

BARD5LEY (Rev. C. W,).— 
Bngllsb Sarnames : Their Sources 
and 'Significations. Cr. 8vo. cloth. 7J- 6d, 

BARGAIN BOOK (The). By C. E, 

JbrnIKGHam. With a Photogravure 
Frontispiece. Demy Svo, cloth, loj. 6d. 
_ net. _ {Sh^rlh. 

BARINO aOULD(S.), Novels by. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 34. 6d. eachj post Svo, 
illustrated boards, 2 r* each: POPULAR 
Editions, medium Svo, 6d, each* 

Red Spider* f B ve*_ 

BARKER (ELSA)e—The Son of 

MKry Pethei. Crown Svo, cloth, 6.t. 

BARR (AMELIA E.)*—Love will 

Venture in. Cr, Svo, cloth, ^s. 6d. 

bXi^ (RO^BERT), Storic5 by. 

Crown Svo, cloth, Tr W. each. 

In a Steamer Chair* With 2 Illusts. 
From Whose Bourne, &c. With 47 
llluftrntions by Hal HURNTand others. 
Revenge I With 12 Illustrations by 

Lancklot Speed .md others. 

A Woman Intervenes* 

A Prince of Good Fellows* With 
IS IHu^tralion« by E. SuLi ivan. 

The Speculations of John Steele* 
The Unc han ging Bast* __ 

BARRETT (FRANK), Novels by. 

Host Svo. illust. bds., 2s. ca.rcl.. 24 , ca, 

The Sin of Olga Zassoulicb* 

Little Lady Linton* 

Honest Davie, 






Ill ST* MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 


BARRBTT( FRANK), Novels by— 

Post 8VO, ihui*. bdv.. cA.? cL, 

John Ford; and Hia Helpmate* 

A Recoilini^ Vengeance. 

Edeut. Ba rnabas. _ 

Cr. 8vo. cioth. 3*. c^/. each ; post 8vo, lUust. 
boards, is. each : cloth limp. is. 6 d, each. 

Found Goilty. 

For Love and Honour. 

Between Lite and Death. 
Fettered for Life. 

A Missing Witness* With ft lllusts. 
The Woman of the Iron Bracelets. 
The Harding Scandal. 

A Prodigal's Progress. 

Folly Mo rrison* _ 

Crown 8vij. cloth, 3^. 6/. each. 
Under a Strange Mask* With iq 
Jllustratinns hv K. F. Hkkwtnall. 

Was Bhe Juatifled? 

Crown 6VO, cKhh. 3,. tvf. each. 

Lady Judas. 

The Error of Her Ways. 
Perfidious Lydia. Wuh Fronlispiece 
bv LudlhvTkkkast. Cr-8vo,cloih,6j. 
Fettered for Life* Popui.ak Edition. 

medium H\t». 

The Obliging Husband, with Col* 
oured Frontjj,piece. Cr. bvo, cl.* 3 j, 6 d.; 
Chr^ip Euition. rlcture c<»ver. net. 

BARRINGTON (MICHAhLi.— 

The Knight of the Golden Sword. 

Crown 8v<i.cloih, 6^. 

bASKERVILLE (JOHN): A 

Memoir. Bv Ralph Stravs and R. K. 
peXT. With T 3 FlaJ«3. Lart;e quarto. 
tmckrAm. aii. net. 


BATH (The) In Diseases of the 
Skin, by J. L. Milto.v, Po^ihvo n • 
clo ih. If. w _ _ 

BEACONSFI ELD~CORDT^BVt. 

y , O'CoxKOR. M-P, Crown 8vo.clr>ih. o 


BECHSTEIN{LUDWia),andthe 

Hrothers GRIMM.—As Pretty es 
Seven, and other Stories. Wiih oft 
Illustrations bv Rjcht*:r. Souare ftvo 
cloth. 6 ,.6d.: Rill edeef^^ 

tm: 


BENNETT (ARNOCD). Novels 

by. Crowo ftvo, cloth oi, each 

Leonora. | a Great Man. 
Tere»a of Watllng Street, w.ths 
ilUistrationsbv Frank Gili ett. 

Tales of the Five Towns. 1 Hugo. 
Saored and Profane Love. 

Crown 8 to, cloth, Mch. 

Anna of the Five Towns. 

The Gates of Wrath. 

^6 Ghos t. I The Cit y of Pleasure. 
The Grand Babylon Hotel. Crown 
8vo Cloth. 3 j. 6(t Popular Euitiox 
medum 8vo. 6 <i. * 

'"■‘J. r*- n«' «ch. 

and Profane Love. 
m a Gh ost. 

(W* C*)e—SongsTor 

Sailors* Post 8to, clolb, 2s, 


BESANT and RICE, Novels by. 

Cr. 8vo. cluUi, 35. tkj, c.ich ; p-'M «vo, 
illusU bds. is. each : cl, liiup, is, cath. 

Ready-Moncy Mortiboy* 

The Golden Butterfly* 

My Little Girl. 

With Harp and Crown. 

This Son of Vuloan. 

The Monks of Thelema. 

By Cellars Arbour. 

The Chaplain of the Piece. 

The Seamy Side. 

The Case of Mr. Luoraft. 

'Twas Id Trafalgar's Bay* 

The Ten Years' Tenant. 

BESANT (Sir WALTERS, 

Novels by. Crown Svo. cloth, 3. • 
each; post ftvo, iltustxated boanK, 2. 
each: cloth limn, 24. fid. each. 

Ail Sorts and Conditions of Men. 

With lalllurtrAiuius hyFKKi) 

The Captain's Room, ac. 

Alt Id a Cardeo Fair. With o Illus¬ 
trations bv Hakky FukxibS, 

Dorothy Forster* With Fromispicuv. 
Unole Jack, and other SioHee. 
Children of Qlbeoo. 

The World Vent Very Well Then, 
With la lllusiraiions by A. Forks iiKK. 
Herr Paulos. 

The Bell of St. Paul's* 

For Faith and Freedom. Wmu 
IJIu&u. bv A. Kurksviku .ind F. \VAfW«\ 
To Call Her Mlne.s'tc. With 9 niu^. 

tratiOMS bv A FORK:>'TIBic. 

The Holy hose, &c. With Frontlsnivcc. 
Armorei of Lyonesae. With la uiuv- 
\r2Uon$. by F. Barnard. 

St« Katherine's by the Tower. 

With I a Illustrations hr C. Grrkx. 
Verbena Camellia dtephanotts. 
The Ivory Gate. 

The Reb^ Queen. 

Beyond the Dreams of Avarice. 

With 12 illuitrAth>n.s bv W. H. Hyok. 

In Deacon's Orders, Ac. With Fronns. 
The Revolt of Man. 

The Master Craftsman* 

The City of Refuge. 

^ Crown 6vn. doth, 3^. 6i. each, 

A Fountain Sealed. 

The Changeling. 

The Fourth Generation* 

The Orange Girl. With ft illustrations 
by F. Prgram. 

The Alabaster Box. 

The Lady of Lynn. Wiih 12 niunra- 
lions by G. Dkmai.v-Hammoxd 
No Other Way. With 12 niusimiions 
by C. D. Wauik _ 

Crown ftvn, picture cloth, flat back, is. vach. 

St. Katherine's by the Tower. 
The Reb el Q ueen. 

Large tytb. Fixe Paper Editions, pott 
svo, cloth, gilt lop. 2s. net each ; leather 
RiU edges, 3 j. net each. 

London. 

Westminster. 

Jerusalem. (In collaboration with Prof, 
E. H, Palmkr.) 


CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


4 

BESANT (Sir WalUrj^-coniinu^J. 

Fine Paper Editions, pott 8vo. zs. net ca* 

Sir Rlcbard Whittington. 
Oatpard de Coligny. 

All Sorts and Conditi ons of Men. 

Popular Editions, medium 8va, 6.^ each. 

All Sorts and Conditions of Uon. 
The Golden Butterfly* 
Ready-Money Mortiboy* 

By Celia's Arbour. 

The Chaplain of the Fleet. 

The Monks o^Tholema* 

The Orange Girl. 

For Faith and Freedom. 
Children of Glbeon. 
DorothyForster* | Ho Other Way* 
Armorel of Lyonesse. 

Demy 8vo» cloth, ys. td. each* 
London. With 125 illustrations. 
Westminster. With Etching by P. S. 

Walker* and 150 Illustrations. 

South London* With Etching by F* S. 

Walker, and 118 lllusUations. 

Bast London. With Etching by F. S. 
Walker, and 56 Illustrations by Piiit 
May, L . Raven Hill, and ]. Pennell. 

Crown 8vo, buckram, 6r. each. 

As We Are and As We May Be. 
Essays and Historiettes. 

The Eulog y of Richard Jefferies* 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3 r. OJ. each. 

Fifty Years Ago* With M4 lllusts. 
The Charm, and otlier Dra\ving«ronm 
Plays, 50 Ul us, by Chris Hammond. &c. 

St. KatherinVs ~ the Tower* 

CllEAi' Edition, picture cover, is, net. 
Art of Fiction* Fcap. 8vo. cloth, u.nct. 

BIBLIOTHECiW^OMAl^lC^ 

Sf'vics of the Classics of the Romance 
(Frenci). Italian, Spanish, and Portu¬ 
guese) Languages; the Original Text, 
with, where necessary, Notes and lntro» 
ductions in the language of the Text. 
Small 8vo, single parts, 8^. net per 
vol. ; cloth, single parts, ts. net per vol. 
Where two or more units are bound in one 
volume the price in wrapper remains 8d. 
per unit, »>., two numbers cost is.^d ,: 
three cost zs .; four cost 2s. Sd. In the 
cloth binding the additional co^^t is 4(/. 
for the first, and id, for each succeeding 
unit: ;.e,. one unit costs ir. : two cost 
IS, 9<l.: three cost as. td.; four cost 3 s. 

I. Moll^re: Le Misanthrope, 
a. Mollcre: Les Femmes savantes, 

3, Corneille: LeCid. 

4. Descartes: Discours de la me- 

thodc. 

5-6. Dante : Dlvina Conmiedi.i 1 . : 
Inferno. 

7, Boccaccio t Decameron: Prlma 

giornalil. 

8 , Calderon; La vida cs siafio. 

9, Restif de la Bretonne; Lun 

2000. 

10. Camocs; Osv^usiadas: Canto I., II. 

11. Racine: Atlialie. 

12-15. Petrarca : Rerun? vuiganum 
fragment a. 


BIBLIOTHECA ROIAAtilCA-ccnginufd. 
i6-;7, Dante: Dlvina Commedia II.; 
Purgatorio. 

18-20. Tlllier: Mon oncle Benjamin. 

3D 22. Boccaccio : Decameron : Seconda 
giornuta. 

33-24. Beaumarchais: Le Barbier de 
Seville. 

25. Camoes: OsLusiadas : Canto 111 *, 
IV 

36-28. Alfred de Musset: Comedieset 
ProvetbeS : La * Nuil vcnitleone ; 
Andr^ del Sarto; Les Caprices de 
Marianne: Fantasio; Onnebadine 
pa«5 avee lamour. 

39. Corneille: Horace. 

30-31. Dante* Dlvina (^mmedia HI.: 
ParndiSO. 

32-34. Provost: Manon Lescaut. 

35-36. CEuvres de Haitre Francois 
Villon* 

87 - 39 - Guillem de Castro: Las Mccc- 
dades del Cid, 1 .. II. 

40. Dante: La Vita Nuova. 

41-44. Cervantes: Clnco Novelas ejem* 
plarcs, 

45. Camoes: Os Lusiadas: Canto V., 

VI.. VII. 

46. MoUere: L'Avarc. 

47. Petrarca: l Trionf). 

4S-49. Boccaccio: Decameron: Terra 
giornata. 

50. Corneille: Cinna. 

SD52 Camoes : Os Lusiadas : Canto VIM., 
IX., X. 

53-54 La Chanson de Roland* 

55*58 Alfred de Musset: Premieres 
Pocsics, 

59. Boccaccio: Decameron: Quarla 
giorn.ita. 

6o*6r. Maistre Pierre Pathelin : 

Farce du XV« siccle. 

62-63. Giacomo Leopardi : Cant). 
64-65, Chateaubriand; Atala« 

66. Boccaccio * Decameron, Quinta 
giornat:!. 

67-70. Blaise Pascal: Lcs Provinciales, 

BIERCE (AMBROSE).—In the 

Midst of Life. Crown 8vo. cloth, 3s. tu.: 
post 8vo. illustrated boards, 2s. ; Cheap 
Ed ilioii. picture cover, n. net. _ 

BINDLOSS (HAROLD), Novels by. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3i. bd. each. 

The Concesstoii'hunters. 

The Mistress of Bonaventure. 
Daventry's Daughter. 

A Sower of Wh eat. _ 

Atnelie’a Ju«Ju. crown Svo. cloth, 
3$. (hi. : picture cloth, flat back. 2f. 

BLAKE VVILLI>rMy; A<^itlcai 

study by A. C. SwixnUKXE. With a 
Portrait. Crown Rvo. buckram. 6r. net. 

BOCCACCIO.—The Decameron. 

With a Porlrait. Pott Svo, cloth, gilt 
lop. 25 . net ; leather, gilt edges, 35. ncii 


in ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 


5 


BODKIN (AlcD., K.C.). Books by. 

Crown 8 VO. cloth, jj. each. 

Dora MyrI, the Lndy Detective. 
Shillelagh and Shamrocks 
Patfiey the Qmadaun. _ 

bORfcNlUS (TANCREDK—The 

PaJQters of Vicenza, With is fuiu 
piU<^ Plat< s. DemvSvn. tloih,7t, 6/. net. 

BOURGET (PAUL).—A Living 

Lie, Translated by John DKViLLiKns. 
Crown Svo, cloth, 31. Od. ; Cheap Edition, 
picture cover, ir. net. 

BOYLE 1 F.)~W^ks”byr Fobl 

8vo. illustrated hoards. 21 c.ndi 

Chronicled of No*Man*6 Land. 
C amp Notes. I S ava ge L ife. 

BRAND (JOHN).—Observations 

CO Popular Antiquities. With the 
Additions 01 Sir iifclNKV ELMS. Crown 
8VO. cloth. fi.L 

BRAYSHAW {J. DODSWORTH). 

— SlumSilhouettes: Stoncsoi London 
Life. Crown 8vo, cloth. %s. 6//. 

BRER“S (Rev. Dr.) Diction. 

aries* Crown 8vo. cloth. 31. each. 

TheRoader'sHandbookofFamous 
Names In Fiction, Allusions, 
References, Proverbs^ Plots, 
Stories, and Poems. 

A Dictionary of IVllraclea: Imitative. 
_ i>V;tliM:c. an<t Dogmanc. 

BREWSTER (Sir DAVIDi. 

Works by. Post 8vo. cloth, 4/. df. each. 
More Worlds than One: Creed of 
Phiiosonhcr. Hope of Christian. Plates. 
The Martyrs of Science: Galileo,, 
TVCHO Lkauk. and Kepi.kk. ' 

Letters on Natural Maf<lc, With 
numerous llluslmtinns. 

BRIDQE CATECHISMT Bv R. 

H. DRVnnES. Kcap. 8vo, cloth, 2<. 6 d. net. 

BRIDQE (J. S. C.).—From Island 

to Empire: ^ Hisloiyof theExpansionof 
Enplaticl by Force of Arms. Willi Intro¬ 
duction byAdm.SirCvPRUN BRIDGK,M;tr$ 
ftod Plans. Larce crown 6vo.cloth.&c net 

BRIGHT (FLORENCE).-A QIH 

CspItAllst. Crown Svo cloth. 6f. 

BROWNINQ»S(ROBTTPOEAiS: 

Pippa Passes; and Men and 
Women. With 10 Plates in Colour 
after Eleakor K. Bhickd^Lk. Large 
fc-^p. 4to, cloth, 6s. net; Large Paper 
L niTiej^, parchment, net.—Also 

an Edition in the ST. MARTIN’S Library 
with Miss Brickdale’sC oloured lllusira- 
I ions, post 8vo,cloth, 7r.net: leather, ST.nrt. 
Dramatis Personos; and Dramatic 
Romances and Lyrics. With to 
Plates III Colour after E, F. BRiCKDAI.R. 
urge fcap. 4to, cloth, ts . net; Large 
Paper Enmov, parchment, isy. 6<f. net, 

SRVDEN iH* A«)«—An Exiled 
Scot. With Frontispiece by L S 
CftOUPTON, R,I, Crown 8yo» cloth, 31.6if. 


BRYDQES {HAROLD). — Uncle 

Sam at Home. Witli c,i IlUisfs, 

Kvo. iDiisf, h^‘arHs • O^^Xh hum 3 <.f*/. 

BUCHANANTROB^f^Poems 

and Novels by. 

The Complete Poetical Works of 
Robert Buchanan. 2 Vois., crown 
8 vo. buckram, with Portrait Frontispiece 
to each volume. T 2 t. 

Crown 8 vo, cioui, 35 . <*J. each : post Svo, 
illuslrdcd ho.trds, it. each. 

The Shadow of the Bword. 

A Child of Nature. 

God and the Man. With 11 I]tustr.v 
tions bv h\ Barnard. 

Lady Kllpatrlok. 

The Martyrdom of Madeline. 
Love Me for Ever. 

Annan Water, j Foxfflove Manor. 
The New Abelard. | Rachel Dene. 
Matt: A story of a Caravan. 

The Master of the Mine. 

The Heir of Linne. 

Woman and_the Man. 

Crown A VO. cloth. t<. of, each. 

Red and White Heather. 

Androm eda. _ 

P<»rVLAR V.xnTloss, nicdinm ^vo, 6 ,/. each. 
The Shadow of the Sword. 

God and the Man. 

Foxglove M^n»._ 

The Shadow of the Sword. Largc 
Type, Fink Paper Edition, Pott 8 vo. 
cloth, gill top* 2 j, net: lcathcr*gilt edgo, 
31. net, _ 

The Charlatan* By KoDEurBucitANAs 
and Hknry Murray. Crown 8 vo, doth, 
with Frontispiece by T. H. KODINSON, 
3 r. 6d .: post 8 vo. illufitrated bo.irds 2 t, 

BURQESS(QELETtl and WTCL 

IRWIN.— The Picaroons: A San 
Fronclsco Night's Hotertaioinent. 

epAvn 8 vo. eloiii, 3 * 6 ^/ 

BURTON (ROBERT), - The 

Anatomy of Melancholy. With a 
Photogr.iviirc Frontispiece. Demy 8 vo, 
^ cloth. 7 ^, (iti. _ 

CAINE (HALL)t Novels by. 

Crown 8 vo, cloth, 3 s. 6 J. each ; post Svo, 
illustrated boards, 2 j. each: cloth limp, 
2 i. Nf. each. 

The Shadow of a Crime. 

A Son of Hagar, | The Deemster. 

Also Lirrary Editions of the three novels, 
crown 8 vo, cloth, 6s. cnch : Cheap Popu» 
LAR EDiTtOK 8 ,n>e(lium 8 vA, portrait cover. 
6 ^^, each ; and the Fine Paper Edition 
of The Deemster, pott 8 vo, cloth, 
_ Cili top. 2 j.net : leather, gilt 'dges, net. 

CAMERON (V. LOVETT).-The 

Cruise of the * Black Prince* 
Privateer. Cr. 8 vo, cloth, with 2 Illus¬ 
trations by P. Macnah, Ss. 6 d.; post 8 vo, 
picture boards, aj. 

CAMPBELL (A. QODRIC). — 

Fleur-de« Camp: a Daughter of 
France. Crown $vo, cloth, 6 s. 







6 


CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


CAMPING IN THE FOREST. 

With Illustrations in Colour and Line by 
Margaret Clayton. Fcap. 41 o, cloth, 
3f. 6 d net, 

CARLYLE (THOMAS),—On the 

Choice of Booka, Post dvo. cloth, \s.(td , 

CARROLL (LEWI5), Books by. 

Alice in Wonderland. With 12 
Coloured and many Line Illustrations by 
MlLLlCENT SOWERBY* Large crown 8vo, 
cloth gilt, 3f. td. net. 

Feedlnf( the Mind. With a Prelace 
by W, H* Drapek. Post 8vo, boards, 
ijf. net: leather, at. net. 

CARRUTM (HAYDENj.—I heAd. 
ventures of Jones. With 17 lllusi^. 
Fcap. 8vo. picture cover, is .: cloth, ts.td. 

CHAPMAN’S (GEORGE) Works. 

VoU I.. Plays Complete, including the 
Doubtful Ones.-^Vol. It.. Poems and 
Minor Trarislations. with Essay by A. C. 
Swinburne.—V ol. III.. Translations of 
the Iliad and Odyssey. Three Vols.. 
crown 8vo, cloth, 6d. each. _ 

CHATFIELD-TAYLOR (H. C.)— 

Fatness Pathway. Cr. 8vo.. cloth. 6 u 

CHAUCER for Children: A Gol¬ 
den Key. By Mrs. H. R. Hawkis. With 
8 Coloured Plates and 30 Woodcuts. 
Crown 4to, cloth. 3J. 6d. 

Chancer for Schools. With theStor>* 
ot his Times and his Work. By Mrs. 
H. R. Haweis. Demy 8vo. cloth. %s. 6 d. 
The Prolo^e to the Canterbury 
Tales. Printed 111 blacU-ietlcr upon 
hand-made paper. With Illustrations by 
Ambrose Dudley. Fcap. 4(0. decorated 
cloth, red top, is. 6d. net. 

C H E S N E Y IWEATHERBY). 

Novels by. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3>. 
each. 

The Cable^man. 

The Roma nce of a Queen. 

T he Cla im ant. svo. cloth. 6<. 

CHESS, The Laws and Practice 

of; with an Analysis oi the Openings, 
by Howard i>TAUNTON. Edited by 
R. B. WORMALD. Crown 8vo. cloth, fr. 
The Minor Tactics of Chess: A 
Treatise on the Deployment oi the 
Forces in obedience to Strategic Principle. 
By F. K. YotiKO and E. C. Howell. 
Fcap 8 VO, cloth. 2 j. 6d. 

The Hastings Chess Toarnamenc. 
The Aut]iorii.c<l Account OI the 230 Games 
played Aug.-SepL. l 895 - With Annota- 
Uoos by PiLLSBURY. Lasker, Tarrasch, 
STEtNrrZ. SCHIFFERS, TfilCHMANN. BAR- 
DELKBEN, BLACKBURS'B, GUNSBERO, 
Tinsley, Mason, and Albin ; Biographi¬ 
cal Sketches, and 22 Portraits. Edited by 
ILK. CH KSH IRK. ^own Rvo. cloth, 

CHILD-LOVER'S CALENDAR, 

I poo. With Coloured Illusts. by AMELIA 
M. BOWERLEY. i6mo, picturebds, ii.oet. 


CLARE (AUSTIN), Stories by. 

By the Rise of the River. Crown 
6vo, cloth. 3.r. 6d. 

Crown 8vo. cloth, 6 s, each. 

The Tideway. 

Randal of Randalholme. 


CLODD (EDWARD). — Myths 

and Dreams- Crown 8vo. cloth. 35. 6 d. 

CLIVE (Mrs. ARCHER), Novels 

by. Post 8vo. cloth. 3^. 6 d. each; illus¬ 
trated boards, is. each. 

Paul FerrolL 

kVhy Paul Ferroll Killed his Wife. 

^BBAN (J. MACLAREN), 

Novels by. 

The Cure of Souls. Post 8vo, illus¬ 
trated boards, zs. 

The Red Sultan. Crown 8vo, cloth, 
%s. 6 d. ; post 8vo, illiislr.itcd boards, 2r. 

The Burden of Isabel. Crown Hvo; 
cl oth. 3r. 6d. 

COLLINS {J. CHURTON, M.A.). 

— Jonathan Swift. Cr. 8vo. cl., 3^. 6 d. 

^LLINS (MORTIMER and 

PRANCHS), Novel, by. Cr.Svo, cl.. 
ji, 6./ each; post fivo, illiiMd, bds., zs. each. 

From Midnight to Midnight. 

You Play me False. 

Blacksmith and Scholar. 

■The Village Comedy. 

Frances._ 

post 8vo, illustrated boards, 21. each. 
Transmigration. 

A Fight with Fortune. 

Sweet Anne Pago. 

Sweet and Twenty. _ 

COLOUR-BOOKS: Topoirraphi- 

caL Large icap. 4 lo» cloth, Jor.nci cuch, 
^Switzerland: The Country and 
its People. By Clarence Hook, 
With $0 lilusiiatlous in Three Colours by 
Mrs. lAMKSjAKDiNE, and24inTwo TinU 
*Th6 Face of China. Written and 
lilus. in Colour aud Line by K. G. KEMP. 
^The Colour of Rome. By Clave 
M. PoriER. Willi Introduction by 
Douglas Sladkn, and Illustrations in 
Three Colours and S.pia by YosHlO 
Markiko- 

^Tbe Colour of London. By Rev. 
W. J. LOKIIK, F.S.A. With inlroducUoD 
by M- H. SpiklMANN. F.S.A., and Illu^ 
trations in Three Colours and Sepia 
hv YOSHIO Makkjno. 

*The Colour of Paris* By MM. lbs 
ACADEMICIKNS GONCOUHT, EdiUd by 
LrciFN Dksc.WEs. With Introduclion by 
L. IE. Translated by M, D. FROST, 

Illustrated in Three Colours and Sepia, 
with an Essay, by YOSHiO MarkINO, 
«Calro« Jerusalem, and DamaBcusj 
By D. S. Margoliouth, LittD. Wilh 
Illustrations in Three Colours by W. S. S, 
‘nHWHITT. R.B.A., and RrOINALD 
Barf ATT. A.R.W.S. 









Ill ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 


a 


CO LO U R - B 00 K5-r<.n/«« 

The Rhine. By H. ). Mackinder. 
Wilh niusirations in Three Colours bv 
Mrs. James Jardixe, and Two ^fap.s. ' 

•fisslsl of St. Francis. By Mr.. 
K. Goff, Intro, by J. Kerr i.awso.x. 
Ulus, in Three Colours by CoL R. Goff 
. and from the Old M.asters. 

Devon: its Moorlands, Streams, 
and Coasts. By Lady HoSAll.su 
Nortkcote. With Illuslratioiis in Three 
Colours bv K. J. Widgerv 

The Greater Abbeys of England. 
By Hinhl Hev. Abbot Gasqcet. With 
6o Illustr-alions iu Three Colours bv 
Warwi ck Goble. _ 

Large foolscap ^lo, cloth, lor. 6d. net each. 

"Yenioe. By Bbryl de Sbli.xcourt and 
At AY Sturge.Hknderso.v. With 30 (llus- 
trntions in Three Colours by Hfgi.xald 
Barratt. W S. 

DUboD and Clntra. By A. C. Isch- 
^LD. With JO musts, in Three Colours 
by hTAX LRV l.VCHBOLD. 

Thames to the Seine. 

- y-r”*^^*** Bears.. W'lih 40 Illusts. 
in Three Colours and Monochrome. Lgc. 
fcap, 4to, cloth, iM 6rf. net. 

OxfoM ft>om the Inside. By Hogh 
DK SttiNCOURT. \Siih2o Illustrations in 
^louT and Monochrome by Yosmo 
MaRkixo. Demy 8 vo. cloih, 7». 6J. net. 

A Japanese Artist In London. By 
rosHio Marki.vo. With « Coloured 
and 4 Monochrome Plates. Crown «*o. 
cloth, djt. net. 

From the North Foreland to Pen¬ 
zance. By Clive Hollasd. With 
lllusts. ID Colour by MAURICE Kakdall. 
l^ge fc.ip,4to, cloth, i«.M. net 

la the Abruzsl: The Country and the 

reople. By ANNE MaCDONELL. With 
latllustratioos in Three Colours by Amy 

n^SH***'**"* Morocco. By ' 
j^UhTSTKRNBERG. With 12 lllusts. in 
l^Btee Colours by DoOOLAS FOR PiTT. i 

^ CoPtra ei, ^re rag faftr »/ 

- th$st m/trk^d^ mav ht had 

con:rascwinciErN5t^irbj: 

ThS *f**l“»d Wife. 


COLLINS (WILKIE) —c^ntinufd^ 

J’OPUIAR Editio.xs, medium 8vo, Arf. eauh. 
Antonina. I Blind Love. 

The Woman In White. 

The Law and the Lady. 
Moonstone. | The Now Magdalen. 
The Dead Secret. I No Name 

Man and Wife | Armadale. 

The Haante d Hotel. 

The Woman In White. Large 1'yph. 
UNK Paper Edition. Pott 8vo, cloth, 
gill lop. rjt. net - leather, gilt edges, ji. net. 
The Frozen Deep. Large la pE Edit. 
heap. 8VO. cl., li. net; leather, li. 6d. neL 


COLQUHOUN (M. J.).—Every 

ineb a Soldier. Crown 8vr>, cloth 
js.fki.-. post Kvo, illustfatgd bo.irds. is. 


COLT-BREAKING, Hints on. By 

W. M . Hutchison. Cr. Svo. cl., jr. w. 

COLTON Arthur). — The 
_8eIte^Se^ Crown cloth, jj. <v/ 

compensation actTthek 

1906: Who peys, to whom, to 
whet, and when It Is applicable. 
By A. CtESfKhn* Edww^ds, M.K Crown 
8vo, u. net: cloth, u. 6 d. net. 

COMPTONiHERBERD.Noveisby. 

The Inimitable Mrs. Masslng- 
ham. Crown 8vo. cloth, sj. od.; POPU¬ 
LAR bPiv tON. medium 8vo . 6rf. 

m. 5^- eacb. 

The Wilful Way. 

3 ]**® Qpeon can do no Wrong. 

To Defeat the Ends of Justice. 

COOPER (E. H.), Novels by. 

Crown 8vo, cl-th, yr. 6d. each. 
Geoffory Bamllton. 

The Marquis and P a mala . 

CORNISH (J. F.).—3our Grapes. 

Crown 8ro. cloth. 6t. 



C O R N W A L L.— P o p u I xTr 

Romances of tbe West of Bneland: 
f ^ radiUons. and Super^tihons 

of Old Cornwall Collected by Robert 
Hukt. F.R.S. With two Plates bv 
__Crvtkshaxk. C^.8vo.cl..7^6d, 

COURT (The) of the Tulleries. 

losa to 1870. By Le Petit Houui 
Rouge. With a Frontispiece. Crown 
Svo, cloth, 7r. 6<i. net. 


CRADDOCK (C. EGBERT), by. 

TheProphet Of theOrdat Smoky 
tfouDcalBSe Crown 8VO4cloth, 3i. 6J.* 
post Svo, illustrated boards, zs. 

ww. ^VO cloth, jr Arf. «ach. 

LHls Vanished Star. TheWindftsll. 

CRESSWELL (HENRY). — A 

Ledy of Misrule. Crown Svo, cloth , 6 s. 

(MATT).—Adventures of 

a Fair Robel. Crown Svo, cloth, xs, 6 J : 
post Svo, illustrated boards, is. 







8 


CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


CROCKETT (S* R*) and others.— 

Tales of our Coast. By a B. 
CROCKErr, Gilbert Parker, Harold 
Frederic; w. Clark Russell. 

With 13 Illustrations by Frank Brano- 
WYK. Crown 8vo> cloth, 3^, M. _ 

CROKER (Mrs. B. M.), Novels 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3^. 6d. each J 
post 8vo, illustrated boards. 2s. each ;| 
cloth limp. 2s. M. each. 

Pretty Hiss NevtUe, 

A Bird of Passage* | Mr* Jervis, 
Diana Barrington* 

Two Masters. 1 Interference. 
A Family Likeness. 

A Third Person* | Proper Pride, 
Village Tales & Jungle Tragedies, 
The Real Lady Hilda. 

Married or^Slnglo?_ 

Crown flvo. cloth, 3«* (yd. each. 

In the Kingdom of Kerry* 

Miss Balmalne's Past. 

Jasod. I Beyond the Pale, 

Terence; With 6 iiuKts. bys. Pagkt. 
The Cat's-paw. With 12 Illustrations 
by Fred 

The Spanish Necklace, With 8 
Illusts.byF. Pkgkam.—A lso a Cheap Ed., 
without lUn‘«ls. picture cover, u. net. 
Crown Svo, cloth. 31. oj. each : p'^st 8vo* 
cloth limp, 2s. ('-d, each. 

Infatuation*_ I _Some One Else, 

*To Lot*' Post Hvo. picture boards, ar, ; 
cloth lim p, ar. 

Poi’ULAR Et)lTlo.\?>, medium 8vo, M. each. 

Proper Pride. I The Cat8-paw» 
Diana Barrington. 

Pretty Miss Neville, 

A Bird of Passage, 

Beyond the Palo, 

A Family Likeness. 

Miss Balmalne's Past. 

Married or Single? _ 

CROSS (MARGARET B ), Novels 

by* Cr<»\vn .Svo. cloth, Or. each. 

A Question of Means* 

ortuuity* W'uu Frontispiece by 
II.DA B. WlKNER^^_ 

CRUIKSHANK’S COMIC AL¬ 
MANACK. Complete in Two Series. 
The FIRST from 1835 to 1843 : Ihe 
Second, from 1844 to 1853. Two Vols.. 
crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. f>d. each. 

CUMMINQ (C, F* GORDONS 

Works by. Oeiny 8vo. cloth, (n. each. 
In the Hebrides, Witli 24 Illustrations. 
In the Himalayas and on the 
Indian Plains, With 42 Jilu^irations 
Two Happy Years in Ceylon. 

With 28 Uluslratmn^. 

Via Cornwall to Eg ypt* F ronth. 

CUSSANS (JOHN E.).—A Hand¬ 
book of Heraldry; including instruc¬ 
tions for Tracing Fedigrees. Deciphering 
Ancient MSS., .Sic, With 40S Woodcuts 
and 2 ColH. PI,ires. Cro\s-n 8vo . cloth, Ct. 

DANBY (FRANK).—A Coquette 

io Crape* Foolscap Svo, cloth. Ir. net. 


DAUDET (ALPHONSE). —The 

Bvongetlst; or* Port Salvation. 

Cr. 8vi> cloth. 3J. (sti .; Svo. bds.. is, 

DAVENANT (FRANCIS).—Hints 

lor Porents on Choice of Prolessloo 
_forjheir Son5 , Crown 8vo. it. hd 

DAVIDSON (H* C.).—Mr. Sad- 

_ ler's Daughters * Cr. 8vo. cloth, $s. td, 

DAVIES (Dr.“N* E. YORKE-), 

Works by, Cr. Svo. i c. ca.: cl, is.t)d,cx 
One Thoasand Medical Maxims 
and Sorgicat Hints. 

Nursery Hints: A Mothers Guide. 
The Dictatic Cure of Obesity 
(Foods for the Fat). With Chnptcrs 
on the Treatment of Gout by Diet* 

Aids to Long^LlfO* Crown Svo. is,; 
cloih, 2J, 

Wine and 'health: How to enjoy 
botu. Crown HvojCloth^lr6J^^_^^^ 

DEAKIN (DOROTHEA), Stories 

by. Crown Svo* cloth, ^s. (U. each. 

The Poet and the Pierrot, 

The Pr incess & t he Kltch en-m aid« 

DEFOE (DANIEL). — Robinson 

Crusoe. Wilh 37 Illust«. by GKORca 
Cruikshank. LargkType. Fine Paper 
Edition. PoU 8 vo, cloth, gilt top, is. net; 
leather, gilt edges, 31. net. __ 

DEMILLE (JAMES).—AStranjre 

Manuscript found In a Copper 
Cylinder Crown hvo. cloth, with 19 
Illustrations by GiLbERT GAUL*3f. 6J.; 
post 8vo . dlustrated boards, is. 

DEVONSHIRE SCENERY, The 

History of. Hv Arthur W.Claydbx, 
M A. With Illus,bcmy8vo.cl..ior W, net. 
Devon: Its MoorlandSf 8treams« 
and Coasts. Bv Lady Rosalind 
XORTHCOTK. with Illustrations in Three 
Colours by F, J. Widcert. Large leap. 
4to. cloth. 20J. net. 

DEWAR IT. R.}. — A Ramble 

Round the Olobe, With 220 Illustra¬ 
tions. Crown Svo. cloth, ys (>d. _ 

dickens (CHARLES)^ The 

Speeches of. Edited and Annotated 
by R. H. biiLPlIERD. With a PorlraiL 
Pott Svo, cloth, IS, net; Ivather, ys. net, 
The Pocket Charles Dickens: being 
Favourite Passages chosen by ALVRKD 
H. Hvatt. cloth, gilt lop. zs. net 5 

leather. gilMop. y s. net, 

DICTIONARIES. 

The Header's Handbook of 
Famous Names in Flctloni 
Allusions* References, Pro* 
verbs.Plots* Stories,and Poems- 

By Kcv. E. C. Brkwer. LL.D. Crown 
8VO, cloth. 3f. 6d. 

A Dictionary of Miracles, 

Imitative, Realistic, and Dogmatic, by 
Kcv. E. C. Bfkwek, LL.D. Crown 8va, 
cloth, 3s, 




Ill ST. MARTINIS LANE, LONDON, W.C. 


<> 


DICTIONARlES-C(?«/i«w^<^. 

Familiar Alluslona. Cy William a. 
And Chaki.es G. Wheeler, Demy Svo. 
eloth, 7 t. <ul, net. 

Familiar Shor( Sayings of Great 
Uen. W'Hiy Historical ana Explanatory 
Notes by Saml^lL A. BEKT, A.M, Crown 
8VO, cloth, ys, (W/. 

TfaeSlangDlctlonary: Etymological, 
Historical, and Auccdot.il Crnwn 8vo. 
cloth. 6^. f-ti. 

Words, FactSi and Phrases: A 

Dictionary oC Curious^ Quaint, nnd Out- 
oi-thc-Way Matters. By Eliezek 
Edwards, Crown 8vo. cloth. %s. (st. 

DIXON (WILLMOTT).—Novels 

^ by. Crown 8v<>. cloth, 6i. each. 

The Rogue of Rye« 

King Hal—of Heronsea. _ 

DOBSON (AUSTIN), Works by. 

Crow'n 8vo. buckram, 6/, each. 

Four Frenehvomen* With Four 
Port ralts. 

Eighteenth Century Vignettes* 

In Three Series, each 6t.: also Fjne- 
I'APER EDlTIOKSof (hc TllUEE SERIES, 
poit 8VO, cloth, if. net each ; leather, 
3 (. net each. 

A Paladin of Philanthropy^ and 
other Papers* With a illustrations. 
Slde*wall£ Studies. With $ Illu^ts. 


DONOVAN (DICK)i Detective 

Stories by. Post 8vo, illustrated 
boards, J.t. each : cloth, is, td. each, 
Caoght at Last. 

In the Grip of Che liavi 
X^lnk by JLlnk. 

From Information Recolyed. 
Suspicion Arousedi 
Riddles Read. 

Chronicl es of MichaelD aiietrUoh. 
Crown 8vo. cl„ y, td. each ; picture cl. 
flat back, is. each: post 8vo, illustrated 
boards. Is. each : cloth Ump. is, 6^. each. 
The Man from Manchester. 

The Myst ery of Jamaic a Terrace* 
Crown 8vo. cloth, tkl each. 
Deacon Brodle : or. Behind the Mask. 
Tyler Tat lock, Private Detective. 
Cr. 8vo, d, 3f. w. ea.; pict. cl. ilat bk, is, ea. 
The Records of Vincent Trill. 
Tales of Terror. _ 

Crown 8vo, cloth, td, each : post Svo, 
illustrated boards, is, each; cloth limp. 
Is. 6d. each 

Tracked to Doom* 

A Detective’s Triumphs* 

Tracked and Taken* 

Who Poisoned He^yJ>a&oa&? 

Crown 8\’o. picture doth, flat back, is. each: 
post 8VO, illustrated boards, zs. each: cloth 
limp, 2s. Od. each. 

WantedI I The Mon ^Hunter* 
Dark Deeds. Crown th*o. cloth limp. 
zs. 6ii ,; picture cloth, flat back, is, 

DOWUNQ (RICHARD). — Old 

Corcorao'a Money. Cr. Svo. cl,3j. w. 


DOYLE {A. CONAN).—The Firm 

of Qirdtestone. Crown Svo, cloth, 31. 6d, 

DRAMATISTS, THE OLD. 

Edited by Col CDN*.vingham. Cr. Svo. 
cloth, with Portraits. 3 j. 6 d. per Vol. 

Ben Jonson’s Works* with Notes, 
Critical and Eiplanaiory, and a Bio* 
graphic.Tl Memoir by WILLIAM GlFPORO. 
Three Vtds. 

Chapman’s Works* Three Vols. V*«l. 
]. contains the Plays complete : Vol, 11 ., 
]*e>cmsand Minor Translations, with an 
Essay by A, C. Swixbuknk; Vol. 111 ., 
Translations of the Iliad and Odyssey. 
Marlowe’s Works* One VoU 
Massinger’s Plays* From Gifford s 
Text. One Vol. 

DUMPY BOOKS (The) 

Children. Roy. .unio, elolh, i.f. net c.i, 

1. The Flamp, The Ameliorator, 
and The Schoolboy’s Appren¬ 
tice. Hy E. V, LUe AS. 

2 . Mrs. Turner's Cautionary 
Stories. 

3 . The Bad Family* By Mrs. 
I-KWVICK. 

4 . The Story of Little Black 
Sambo* By Hkles Ban.vkrmas. 
Il)ii'«tr;it(r<l in colours. 

5 . The Bountiful Lady. By Thomas 
COIMI. 

7 . A Flower Book* Illustrated in 
Coloorii bv Nelmk BKKSON. 

8 * The Pink Knight* By J. R. Mon* 
^KLL. Illustrated m civlours, 

0 * The Little Clown* By Thomas 
C oim. 

10 . A Horse Book. By MartTourteu 
lllii^traicd in colours. 

11 * Little People; an Alphabet. By 
Henky M,\YBRandT. W. H. Crosland. 
Illustrated in colours. 

12 . A Dog Book* By EriiEL Bicknkll* 
With Pictures in colours by Cauton 
Moore Park. 

I 13 . The Adventures of Samuel 
and Sollna. By Jean C. Archer, 

Illustrated in Cidours. 

If. The Little Girl Lost* By Eleanor 

Rapkr. 

15 * Dollies. By Richard Hunter. 

Illn<traled in cnlouis by RCTII Conn. 
16 . The Bad Mrs* Ginger, By Honor 
C. ArPLEiox, Iliustraitd in colours. 

17 < Peter Piper’s Practloal Prin- 
olples* Illustrated in colours. 

18 . Little White Barbara. Hy 
Ki.haxor March. Illustrated in colours, 
20 . Towlooks and his Wooden 
Horso* By Alice m. Appleton. 
llliK.in colours by Honor C. ArPLFTON. 
21 * Three Little Foxes* By Mary 
Tourtel Ulusiralod in colours. 

22 . The Old Han’s Bag* By T. W* 

H. Crusland. Ulus, bv f. R. MOKSEtL* 

23 . Three Little Goblins. By M. 
G. TA('*oart. Illustrated in colours. 

25 * More Dollies. By Richard Hun- 
tEic iiius* in colours hy Ruth Cobb* 






(O 


CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


DUAIPY BOOKS^onltfiufd. \ 

2o* Little Yellow WaDg-lo« By M. 

C. liELL. IHustr jted lu ctnours. 

23. Tbo Sooty Man. Bv E. B. 

Mackinkon and Eden Coybee. Ulus. 
30 . Rosalina. Illustrated iu colours by 
Jean c, Akchsr. 

31* Sammy and the Snarlywlnk. 

lllusiratcu jn colours by Lena Acitd Nor¬ 
man Ault. 

33. Irene^B Christmas Party. By 

Richard Hunter Uius. by Klth Cobb. 

34. The Little Soldier Book. By 
Jessie Pope. Illustrated in colours by 
Hr\ry Maykr. 

35 * The Dutch Doll's Ditties* By 

C. AUBREY MOOKK 

36. Ten Little Nlg^r Boys. Bv 

NnR\ Cask. 

37. Hunipty Dumpty's Little Son. 

By lEi.ES K. Cross. 

33 . Simple Simon* By Helen R. 
CK^)SS. Iklui^trated in colours. 

39 . The Little Frenchman. By 
Eden Coybee. Illustraicd in colours by 
K. I. Fricero. 

40 . The Potato Book* By Lily 
S ciiOfJEl D. lllu*«traicd in colours. 

DUNCAN (SARA JEANNEfTE)T 

Books by* Cr. dvo, cloth, ys, 6</. each. 
A Social Departure* With lu 
Illustrations by F. H. TOWSSENt). 

An American Girl in London. 

With Ko Illu%trationshy F. H.ToWNsknd. 
The Simple Adventures of a 
Memsahlb* Wah y? lilustratioD^. 

Crown 8 vo, cloth.each. 

A Daughter of To-Day* 

Vernon's Aunt* With 47 Illustrations. 

DUTT(ROMESH C.)*—England 

and ladia: Progress during One 
Hundred Years. Crown 8vo, cloth. 2s, 

DYSON (EDWARD). — In the 

Roarioj; Fifties. Crown ftvo.cloth.6f. 

EDWARDES (Mrs. ANNIE), 

Novels by* 

A Point of Honour. Post 8vo, 

iihislratccl bo.irds. as. 

Archie Lovell. Crown 8vo. cloth, 
^s. ; post Hvo. illustrated boards, 2^. 

A PlaoCer Saint* Cr. dvo. cloth, 6 d, 

EDWARDS (ELIEZER).— 

Words, Facts, and Ktarascs: A Dic¬ 
tionary of Curious, Quaint,and Out-of-thc- 
Way Matl«. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3r. 6 d. 

EQERTCm (Rev. J. C.).— 

Sussex Folk and Sussex Ways* 

With Four 1 busts. Crown 8vo, cloth, Sr. 

EGGLESTON (EDWARD).— 

Roxy. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, is. 

ENGLISHMAN (An) in Paris: 

Kccollections of Louis Philippe and the 
Empire, Crown 8vo, doth, 3r. W. 


EPISTOL/E OBSCURORUM 

Vlrorum (1515-1517). Latin Text, 
with Translation, Introduction, Notes, 
&c., by P.G. Stokes* Royal 8vo, buck. 
ram, 255. net _ 

EVERYMAN: A Morality, 

With Illustrations by AsiBRose Dudley* 
Printed on pure rag paper. Fcap* 4to, 
decorated cloib, red top. xr. 6 d. net 

EVES, Our: How to Preserve 

Them. By JOHN BROWNING* Crown 
8vo, cloth, u. _ 

FAI R Y TALES FROM 
TUSCANY. By Isabella M. Andek- 
TON* bquare i6mo* cloth, with Frontis¬ 
piece, i^» net. 

FAMILIAIT ALLUSIONS: Mis- 

ccliaocous Information, iocludiog Cele* 
brated Statues, Paintings Palaces, 
Country Seats, Ruins. Churches. Ships 
Streets, Clubs. Natural Curiosities, &c. 
By W. A. and C. G, Wheeler. Demy 
Syo. cloth, yt. 6d. net* _ 

FAMILIAR SHORT SAYINGS 

of Great Men* By S. A. Bent. A.M. 
Crown 8vO| cloth, ys. 6d. 

FARADAY (MICHAEL), Works 

by* Post 8vo, cloth. 4^* 6c/. each* 

The Chemical uiatory of a 
Candle: Lectures dehvered before a 
Juvenile Audience. Edited by WjLUASf 
Crookes. F.C.S. With numerous Illusts* 
On the Various Forces of Nature, 
and their Relations to each 
other. Edited by William crookbs. 
h.C.S. With Illustrations. 

FARRAR (F.W.. D.D.).—Ruskin 

as a Religious Teacher. Square 
>(>mo, cloth, with Fronti s piece, ts, net* 

FARRER (J* ANSON).—War: 

Three Essays* Crown 8vo, cloth. 

FENN (O. MANVILLE), Novels 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth, ^s. 6d. each; 
post 8vo. Illustrated boards, aj. each. 

The New Mistress* 

Witness to the Deed. 

The Tiger Lily. 

The Whi te Virgin. 

Crown $ 70 . doth, a 5. 6d. each* 

A Woman Worth Winning. 
Cursed by a Fortune. 

The Case of At Isa Gray. 
Commodore Jonk* 

Black Blood. I In Jeopardy* 
Double Cunning. 

A Fluttered Dovecote. 

King of the Castle. 

The Master of the Ceremonies* 
The Story of Antony Grace. 

The Man with a Shadow. 

One Maid’s Miaoblef* 

This Man's Wife. 

The Bag of Diamonds, and Three 
Bits of Paste. 

Running Amok. 














Ill ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON. W.C. ii 


FENN ( 0 * 

Crown »vo. cloth, 31. 6d, each. 

Black Shadows. 

The Cankerworm. 

Bo Like a Woman* 

A Grlmsoii Crime* Crown Rvo. clolh. 
3.L bd.: pichire cloth, iM bAck, is,; 
jPoPL'LAR Edition, medium >vo, fd. 

FRANCO - BRITISH EXHIBI¬ 
TION Illustrated P?evlew (^Thei, 
ipob. Proiu'^ly iMcslMtcd. Edited by 
KG. DCMA5;. Kfilio. cioUl gilt, loj 6if.nct. 

FREDERIC (HAROLD), NoveU 

by, P^»st Hv). clvlh. 3;. Cd, each: 

tJiusfr.ited b<*.»rds. 2« cAch. 

Sctb'e BroCher's Wife* 

The Lawton Girl, 

FICTION, a Catalogue of, with 

Descriptions and kcviews ol nearly 
Twelve Hundred Noveus. will be 
sent ^ree by Chatto & WiNDUSupon 
appitcailon. 

FIREWORK - MAKING, The 

Complete Art ol; or, The Pyroicchmst's 
Trer^sury. By THOMAS KestisH With 
267 lllw?tralions. Cr. 8vo. cloth, y. 

FREEMAN (R, AUSTINl,—John 

Thorndyke’a Cases, lllusirated by H. 
M. Brock, MXfi fTorn Photographs, 
Crow® Kv<». cloth, 5c 6ii. 

FRENCH VERSE, an Anthology 

of. With Introduction and Notes by C. 
B. Lewi». and a Photogravure Krooti<. 
Sm.ill i rown Sf'i cloth. >r. net, [Shor/iv, 

FISHER (ARTHUR O.), Novels 

by. Crown ijvo, cloth, (i.<. each. 

Withy ford. With Coloured Frontis* 
tnece by O. D. ArmoI'H, .ind s Plates in 

FRY *5 (HERBERT) Royal 

Guide to tbe Loodon Charities, 

hxiitt'd by JOH.s* Lank. Published 

Annually. Crown 8vo, cicth, is, 61 . 

sepia by R. H. Mlxtox. 

The Land of Silent Feet. With a 
Frontispiece by O. l>. ARMOi*K. 

GARDENING BOOKS. PostSvo, 

ly. c.^ch ; cloth, is, 6d. each. , 

A Year's Work In Garden afid 
Greenhouse. By OKouob Gi ensv. 
Household Horticulture* By TOi^i 
.indJ ane )KKRni.i>. Uhi>mted. 

The Garden that Paid the Rent, 

Pv lOM JkRKOLD 

Our Kitchen Garden. By Tom 

IKEKOLO. Post 8VO, clolh, U ncl. 

Sir William Temple upon the 
Gardens of Bplourus; with other 
O.tiden E^savs. buitid bv A. KoPDKS 
SitVKKfNO, K.S.A. With 6 illustrations. 
Small 8vo, boards, is, 6d, net ; qu.irter 
vellum, IS, Cd. net; three-quarter vellum, 
5i. net. 

FITZGERALD (PERCY), by. 

Fatal Zero. Crown 8vo« clolb, y, td.x 
post bvo, illustrated boards, zr. 

Post 6vo, Illustrated boards. 21. each. 

Bella Donaa* | Polly. 

The Lady of Brantome. 

Never Forgotten. 

The Second Mrs* Tlllotaon* 
Beventy-flve Brooke Street* 

Bamuel Foote: a Biography* With a 
Photogravure Frontispiece. Demy 8vo, 
cloth. 12^. 6d. net. 

FLAMMARION (CAMILLE).— 

Popalar Aatronomy* Translated 
by j. Eluard Gore, F.lCA.b. With Thrw 
Plates nod a88 Illustrations. A New 
Edition, with an Appendix the 

results ol Recent Discoveries. Medium 
8vr>, cloth, iaf.6,/. 

GAULOT (PAUL), Books by. 

The Red Shirts: A late of 'The 
Terror.' Translated by John de Vil¬ 
li krs. Crown 8 VO. cloth, with Frontis¬ 
piece by Stanley Wood, 34. 6tf. ; picture 
cloth, fiat back*. 2s> 

Crown fivo, cloth, 6 j. each, 

Love and Lovers of tbe Past, 
Tninshiicd by C. I.ako< hk, M.A- 
A Conspiracy under the Terror, 
Translated by C. Laroche. M.A« With 
Illustrations and Facsimiles, 

FLORENCE PRESS 800KS.- 

For information as lo this important 
Series printed from a new tNpe designed 
by Herbert P. HoRNa’ now first 
engraved, see special Prospectuses. 

FORBES (Hon, Mrs. WALTER). 

—Dumb. Crown 8vo cloth, jr. 6*f. 

GERAIAN POPULAR STORIES, 

Collected bv the (iiothers Grium and 
Translated bv £[»gak Taylor. With 
Introduction by John Ruskin, .ind 2a 
Steel Plates after OEORGre Cruikshaxk. 
Square Hvo, cloth gilt. 6r. 

FRANCILLON (R. E.), Novels 

by. Crown 8vo, cloih, 3i.6rf. Mch; post 

8vo. illustrated boards, is. each, 

Odo by Odo I A Heal Queen. 

A Dog and his Shadow, 

Ropes of Baud, With Illustrations 

Post 8vo, illustrated boards. a». each. 

Romances of tbe Law. 

King or Knave ? | Olympia. 

Jack Doyle's Daughter. Crowq tvo. 

cloth, is. 6d. 

GIBBON (CHARLES), Novels 

by. Crown 8vo. cloth, y, 6 d. each; 
pcist 8vo. illustrated boards, zs. each. 

Robin Gray, 

The Golden Shaft. 

The Flower of the Forest. # 

The Braes of Yarrow. 

Of Hltfh Decree. 

Queen of tbe Meadow. 









12 


CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


GIBBON (CHARLES)— 

Post Svo, illustrated boards. 2^. each. 

For Lack of Gold. 

What Will the World Say? 

For the King. | A Hard Knot. 
In Pastures Green. 

In Love and War. 

A Heart's Problem* 

By Mead and Stream. 

Fancy Free. | Loving a Dream. 
In Honour Bound. 

Heart's Delight. \ Blood*Money* 


The Dead Heart. Post 8vo. illustrated 
b<iaids. 2^.; Poi'L'LAK EDITION, medium 
8vo. 6</. 


GERARD (DOROTHEA).—A 

Queen of Curds and Cream. Crown 
8vo, cloth, 3f. od. 


QIBNEY (50MERVILLE).— 

^Sentenced I Crown 8vo. cloth, is. 6 d. 


GJBSON (L. 5.)» Novels by. 

Crown 8 VO, cloth. 3t. 64 . cach. 

The Freemasons* | Burnt Spices. 
Ships of Desire. 

The Freemasons* Cheap Edition, 
picture cover, is. net. 


GILBERT (WILLIAM).—James 

Duke» Costermoneer* Post8vo, illus¬ 
trated boards, 2s. 


GILBERT'S (W. S.) Original 

Plays. In 3Series. Kinb-Paper EuntON, 
I'oti 8vo, cloth, ^ilt top, 2s. net each ; 
leather, gilt edges, 3^. net each. 

The First Skriks contains: The Wicked 
World — Pygmalion and Galatea — 
Charity—The Princess—The Palace of 
Truth—Trial by Jury—lolanlhc. 

The Second series contains: Broken 
Hearts — Engaged — Sweethearts — 
Grctchen — Dan'l Drucc—Tom Cobb 
—H.M.S. ‘Pinafore*—The Sorcerer— 
The Pirates of Penzance. 

The Third Series contains: Comedy and 
Tragedy — Foggerty's Fairy — Kosen- 
crantz and Guildenstern-Patience— 
Princess Ida—The Mikado—Rnddigore 
—The Yeomen of the Guard—The Gon¬ 
doliers—The Mountebanks-Utopia. 

Bight Original Comic Operas 
written by W. 6 . GILUert. Two Series, 
demy 8vo. cloth, 6*f. net each. 

The First Series contains: The Sorcerer 
—H.M.S. 'Piiiaf<)rc‘—The Pirates of 
Pcn/niicc — lolanlhc— Patience — Prin¬ 
cess Id.a—The Mikado—Trial by Jmy. 

The Second Series contains: The Gon¬ 
doliers—The Grand Duke—The Yeomen 
of the Guard—His Excellency—Utopia. 
Limited—Ruddigorc—The Mountebanks 
— Haste to the Wedding. 

The Gilbert and Sullivan Birth¬ 
day Book: Quotations for Every Day 
in the Year. Compiled by A. WATSON. 
Royal i6mo, cloth. 2r. 6 ds 


GISSINQ (ALGERNON), Novels 

by. Cr. 8vo, cloth, gilt top. 3^. 6 d. each* 
Knitters In the Sun. 

The Wealth of Mallerstang. 

An Angel's Portion. 

Baliol Garth. 

Tho Dreams of Simon Dsher. 

G L A N V i LLETERNESfirNT^ 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth, $s. td, each: 
post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
The Lost Heiress. With 2 illustra¬ 
tions by Humk Nisuet. 

The Foaslcker: A Romance of Mash« 
onaiand. Two Ulusls. by HUME Nisbkt. 
A Fair Colonist. With Frontispiece. 

Crovvii Kvi). cioih, 3J. bd. each. 

The Golden Rock. With Frontispiece 
by STANLEY WOOD. 

Tales from the Veld. With 12 Illusts. 
Max Thornton. With 8 Illustrations 
by J. S. Crompton, rj, _ 

GLENNY (GEORGE).—A Yearns 

Work in Garden aod Greenhouse: 

Practic.il Advice as to Flower, Fruit, and 
Frame Garden. Post 8vo. is. ; cL, it. t>d , 

GODWIN (WILLIAM).— Lives 

of the Necrom an cers. Post 8vo. cl., zs, 

GOLDEN TREASURY of 

Thought. The: A Dictionary of Quo- 
t.ilions from the Best Authors. By 
Theodore Taylor, Cr 8vo. cl,, 3.^. 6 d, 

GOODMAN (E* J.)—The Fate of 

_ H e rbert W a yne. Cr. 8vri. cl.. 

GORDON (SAMUEL). — The 

Ferry of Fate: a Tale of Russian 
Jewry. Crown 8vo, cloth, <>s. 

GORE (J.^LLARD, F.R.A.S.).— 

Astronomical Curiosities : Facts and 
Fallacies, Crown 8vo, cloth, 6 s. net. 

GRACE (ALFRED A.).—Tales 

_of a Dying Race. 8vo, 

^EEKS AND ROMANS, The 

Life of the, described from Antique 
Monuments. By ERNST GVHL and W, 
KoNER. Edited by Dr. F. Hukkper. 
With 5.15 Illu sts. Demy 8vo. c) ., yt. 6 d, 

GREEN (ANNA KATHARINE), 

Novels by. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6 s, each. 

The Millionaire Baby. 

The WoiMn I n the Al ooirej 
The Ametbyat Box. Crown 8vo, 
cloth, 3^. ini. _ _ 

GREENWOOD (JAMES).—The 

Prisoner In the Dock. Crown 8vo, 
cloth. 3$. 64 . 

GREY (Sir GEORGE).—The 

Romance of 0 Proconsul. By James 
M iLNK. Crow n 8vr». bucKrnm> (>s. ' 

GRIFFITH (CEClLj.-Corinthia 

Marazlon. C rown 8vo, cloth. 3x. 64 , 

OWI^THS (MajorA.).—No. 99. 

and Blue Blood. Ciown 8vo, cloth, u. 











Ill ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDO^>\ W.C. 13 


QUTTENBERO (VIOLET), 

Novels by. Crown «vo, cloU*. or. vjch. 

Neither Jew rnor Greek. 

The Power of the Palm • _ 

OYP. — CLOCLO. Translated by 

Nora M. STATnA^(. Cr. 8vo.cU 

HABBERTON (JOHNK—Helen’s 

Babies. With Coloured Frontispiece 
and f o Illustrations by Eva Koo*. i-cap. 
4to, clolh, __ 

HAIR, The; Its Treatment in 

Health, Weakness, and Disease. 

Traiislaicd innn Uic Oorinaii ol Df. J. 
PiNClN. Crown 8vo. a. ; cloth. l<. 

HAKE (Dr. T. GORDON), Poems 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth. i>s. 4:ach« 

Now Symbols. 

I^egenda of the Morrow« 

The Serpent Play. 

Malden Ecsta s y. Small 4 ^ 0 . cloth, g s . 

HALL (Mrs. S. C.).—Sketches 

ol Irish Character. With llliistr.i- 
tions on Steel and Wood by Ckuik* 
SHANK. MACLISE. GILBERT. AUd HAKVEY. 
DcjTjy 3 VO, cloth, 71. 

HALL (OWEN). Novels by. 

The Track of a Storm. Crown 8 vo. 

picture clolh, llM back. 29. 

Jetsam. Crown 8 vo> clolli . y. 6 i. 

Crown 8VO. cloth, ts. each. 
Bureka ._ | Horna nd o. 

hallTday (AN'DRE’W).— 

Every-day Papers. Tost hvo, illus¬ 
trated 2 « 

HAMILTON (COSMO), Stories 

by. , 

The Glamour of the Impossible;: 
and Through a Keyhole* Crown 

8VO, cloth, y. oc/. 

Crown 8vo. cloth. each. 

Nature's Yatfabond, ftc« 

Plain Brown* _ 

HANDWRITING, The Philo- 

sophy of. With over too FacsnnilesJ 
By Don FEUX 1 >B SALAUA.VCA. Post 
_ 8\-0, haU<loth. JJ. 6d. 

HARDY (IZA DUFFUS), Novels 

by. Crown 8 vo. cloth, 3 ^ td. t»cn- 

The I«esser BvU. 

Man, Woman, and Fate* 

A B utterfly .__ 

HARDY (THOMAS). — Under 

the Greenwood Tree. Post 8vo, cloth, 
y, (>fi ,illustrated boards, zr.; cloth 
limp, 2 s. td. Also the Fine Papbr 
Edition, pott 8vo, cloth, gilt top, as. net • 
leather, gill edges, 5^. net: and the Cheap 
Edition, medinm 9y<t,6d. 

HARKINS (E* F.),—The Schem* 

crs. Crown 8vo» cloth, Sr. 


HARRIS (JOEL CHANDLER), 

Bookd by. 

Uncle Bemuo. Witli 0 Coloured nnd 
otlivj* llhiNii.iti'in'iby j* A. 
pnit 4tr». violli, l ilt (op. <>S. 

Nights with Undo Remus. With 
« Odourrd iukI 50 oli*cf IllUblrations by 
I. A.SHI*r ^HKHD. Imperial ir^ano.cloth,6< . 

HARTE’S (BRET) Collected 

Works. LIHRAUY EDITION, in Ten 
VoUiines. crown kvu. cloth, 3c. 6.7. ench. 
V0I. LCOllI'i-KTfc I^OKrJCAL AND 
DVAMATIC WOUKS. Wilhl* irl. 
]|. THK LVCK OK Koaking Cam I*— 
lioHKMIAXi^APERS—AMERICAN 
Ekcrnds. 

III. Talks uk tub Arconaits— 
Eastern Skktches. 

^ IV. GaUKIKL CONROY. 

V. SioKiti —Condensed Novels. 

VI. Talks OK THE Pacific Slokk. 

VII. TAI KSOFTHfcPACIFICSLOrK-II. 
With Portrait by JOHN PettIE. 
VIH. Talks of Pine and cypress, 

I, IX. kl CKKVE AND CH WPARI L. 

X. T ales of Tra il and town. 

Bret Harte's Choice Works in Prose 
:mi (1 Vei>c. With Portrait .tnd 40 Ulus* 
tT.nthins. Crown Svo, cloth, td, 

Bret Harte'B Poetical werks* in- 
chiding Some Later verses, crown 
8vo. biickr.nm, 4^, 6 d. 

In a Hollow of the Hills. Crown 

8vo. pictur e cloth, flat back, is. 

Pott 8vo, cloth, 2 S, nci ta.; leAihcr, y. neL 

Mliss, Luck of Roarlnk Camp« fto. 
Condense d NovoI b._ 

Crown 8VO. cloth 161. each. 

On the Old Trail. 

Under the Redwoods. 

From Sandhill to Pine* 

Stories in Light and Shadow. 
Mr. Jack Hamlin's Mediation. 
Trent's T rust. _ 

Crown Svo, cloth, y. 6 d. each ; post 8vo, 
illuiftrated boards, 2j. each. 

Gabriel Conroy. 

A Waif of the Plains. With Oo Illus¬ 
trations by Stanley L. Wood. 

A Ward of the Golden Gate. With 
59 iHus trations by ^tanlev L. Wood. 

Crown 8vf>, cloth, 3x. (xi c.Ych. 

Susy* With 2 niustR, by I. A. Christik. 
The Bell-Rlntfer of Antfej'St 
With 39 niusUv by Dudley IIahdy, kc. 
Clarence : A Story of the American War. 

With 8 Illustratioasby A. JULK GOODMAN. 
Barker's Luck, ^c. with .^Q^niustra- 

lions by A. FOHLSTIKR, PAUL HARDY, &C, 

DevrlPs Ford. 

The Crusade of the ^Excelsior*' 
WithFranlis.bvJ. BERNARD Pa RTRI DCK. 
Tales of Trail and Town. With 
Frontispiece by G. 1 *. Jacomb-Hood, 
Condensed Novels. New Series. 
Three Partners: or« The Bid 
Strike on Heavy Tree Hill« 
With 8 lUustraUooa by J. GUUCH. Also 
s Popular Edition, medium 8 to, 6d« 





CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 




HARTE {^hliE.T)^continned, 

CriAva «vo» cloth, ^.6d. each; picture cloth, 
flat back, as. each. 

A Sappho of Green Springs. 
Colonoi Starhottl6*6 ClienL 
A Protd^de of Jack Hamlin’s. 

With numeroxis lUuscratioos. 

Sally Dows, &c. With 47 Illustratioos 
by VV. D. ALMOND and oth ers. 

Post 8vo. Illu^^trated boards, 1%. rach. 
The Luck of Roaring Camp, and 
Sensation Novels Condensed. 
(Abo in picture cloth at same pncc.) 

An Heiress of Red Dog. 

The Luck of Roaring Camp. 
Californian Stor ies* 

PostSvo, lUus. bds.. 2r-cach: cloth. 2t.<^i.cach. 

Flip. I A Phyllis of the Sierras. 

Maruja. Crown Svo, cloth. 3^* 

p u lure boards, is .; clo t h lim p. 

liAWEISlMrs. H. R.). Books by. 
The Art of Dress. With 3^ iuumi.«* 
tioDs. Post ^Svo. ji : cl<jth, l.r. M. 
Chaucer for Schools. With Frontis- 
]*kVL'c. Dcniy cloth. 2t. 6d, 
Chaucer for Children. ^vith 8 
Colouied Plates and 30 Woodcuts. 
Cr«>w;j 4to, cloth, 3r. _ 

HAW El sTRev. H. fc).—A merf- 

can Humorliits: WA?^HiN<*ro\ 
Ik VINO. Oliver Wknokll Holmes, 
Iambs Russell Lowkll. aktbmus 
Ward. Mark Twain, and Bkhf Harte. 
Cn‘wn 8VO, cloth, 6», _ 

HA“WTH0RNE (JULIAN), 

Novels by. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3«. fw/. 

eaoht post 8vojlhi^l rated ho.irds. 2s. each. 

Garth. I Bllice Quentin. 
Fortune’s Fool. I Dust. Pour IMusls. 
Beatrix Randolph. With Four Jllusts. 
D. Poindexter's Dlsappearanoe. 
Tho Spectre of the Camera. 

Cro'v'n hvo, cloth, is. 6J. each. 

Sebastian Strome. 

—ora Na me. 

Miss Cadogna. 1 <n*^tratcd 2s. 

HEaVLY“{,CHRIS). Books by. 

Oown ^Svo cloth. tSr. ench. 

ronfesslons of a Journalist. 
Heirs of Reuben. I Mara. 

The Endless Heritage. Crown 8vo. 

Cl »?n. Uii. _ 


HELPS (Sir ARTHUR). —Ivan 

dc Biron. Crown rtvo, cioth 3-t. O.L; 

rn<! nw. _ 


HENRY OF NAVARRE (The 

Favourite, of). By Le Petit Hommk 
J<()UGE. Wilh 6 Portraits. Demy 8vo, 
clot h, 7J. net. _ 

HENtY (G. A.), Novels by. 

RuJUb, the Juggler. Post 8vo. cloth. 
Orf.; ilhnlr.ntfd »'orirds i$. 

Crown fivo, cloth, 3^. oj. each. 

The Queen's Cup. 

Dorothy’s Double. 

Colonel Thorndyke's Saorets 


HENDER50N (ISAAC).—Agatha 

Paj^e. Crown 8vo. cloth. 3^. 6d. 


HERBERTSON (JESSIE L.).— 

Juoia. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6^. _ 

H^MAN (HENRV)e—A Leading 

Lady. Post 8vo. cloth. 6d. _ 


HILL (HEADON).—Zambra the 

Detective. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3r. 6d ,; 
picture cloth, flat back, 


HILL (JOHN), Works by. 

Treason^FelODy* Post 8vo. illustrated 
boards. 2s, 

The Common Anoeator* Crown 

Hvo, cloth, is, Oii, 

HINKSON (H. A.), Novels hy. 

Crown 8 VO. cloth. 6s. each. 

Pan Fitzgerald. | Sil k and Steel . 

HOEY (Mrs. CASHEL). —The 


Lover’s Creed. 

3s. (sd. 


Crown Svo, cloth, 


HOFFMANN (PROFESSOR),— 

King Koko. A Maitic Story. With 25 
l IlHsiratiotK. Crown Svo, cloth, is. ne t. 

HOLIDAY, Where to go for a. 

By E. P. SHOLL. Sir H. Maxwell, John 
Watson. Jane Barlow. Mary Lovett 
Cameron, Jostin H. McCarthy, Paul 
l.ANor, J. w. Graham. J. H. Salter, 
Phceb* Allen, s. J. Beckett, L. Rivers 
Vine, and C. K. Gordon Cummino. 
Crnwn 8vo. cloth, is. f>d. _ 

HOLMES (C. J., M.A.).—Notes 

on the Science of Plcture«maktng. 

With Photo^jravure Frontispiece. Demy 
Kvo, cloth. 7 j. 6(. net. 


HOLMES (O. WENDELL).— 

The Autocrat of the Breakfast- 
Table. Illustrated by J, GORDON 
TnoMbON, FiNB Paper Edition, pott 
8vo. cloth, liilt top, a/, oct.j luntbcr, ijllt 
edt^tfs, js. net. 

HOOD^S (THOMAS) Choice 

Work* \n Prose and Verie. With 
Life ol (he Author. Portrait, and 200 
Illus trations. Crown Svo, cloth, js 6d. 

H^K’S (THEODORE) Choice 

rtumoroua Works; including his Ludi¬ 
crous Adventures, Bons Mots, Puns, 
Hoaxes. With Life and Frontispiece. 
Crown Svo cloth, y. bd, 

HOPKINS (TIQHE), Novels by. 

For Freedom. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6 j. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 35. 6d, each. 

’Twlxt Love and Duty. 

The Incomplete Adventurer. 
The Nugents of Carrlconna* 

Nell With 8 lllustrathms, 

HORNE {RrHENOIST).-OrioD. 

With Portrait. Crown Svo, cloth, ^s, 





Ill ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 


I • 


HORNIMAN (ROY), Novels by. 

Crown 8VO. cloth. 6 s. each. 

Beliamy the Ma^lflcent. 

Lord Ca mmarleigh’s Socrec. 

Israel Ranh; Crown 8vc>. cloth. 6J. 

HORNUNG (E. Wj. Novels by. 
The Shadow of the Rope. Crown 
SvOp cjoih, ^s, OJ. 

Crown »vo. cloth, ^is, each, 

Stingaree . | A Thief in the Wig ht. 

HUEFFER(FORD AIAUOX).—A 

Call: The Tale of Two Passions. 
Crown 8vo. cl<Uh, 6;. 

HUGO iVICTORK—The ^tlXw 

of Iceland. Xrani»lated by Sir On.BERT 
Caupbell. Crown 8vo, cloth, ys. f>d. 

HUME (FERGUS), NovefsTyC 

The Lady From Nowhere. Cr. bvo. 

doth. 35. 6<i.; picture clciih. Hal back. 
The Hllllonaira Mystery. Crown 
8 VO. cloth, 3 <. od. 

The Wheeling Light. Crown 8vo, 

cloth, p;l( top. c 

HUNGERFOkD~Mrs^), Novels 

by. Crovrn bvo. cloth, ys. W. c.ich : 
post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. t.ich: 
cloth Ump, 21. c;<ch. 

The Professor's Experiment. 
Lady Verner's Flight. 

Lady Patty. ( Peter's Wife. 
The Red-House Mystery. 

An Unsatisfactory Lover* 

A Maiden All Forloro. 

A Mental Struggle. 

Marvel. I A Modern Circe. 
In Durance vile. | April's Lady* 
The Thre e Graces. I No ra Croina. 

Crown 8vo. cloth, ys 6 d, each. 

An Anxious Moment* 

A Point of Conscience* 

The Com ing of Chioe* | Lev Ice* 

The Red-Rouse Mystery* Popular 
Edition, mcdlutn dvo. td 

HUNT (Mrs. ALFRED;, Novels 

by. Crow-n8vo.cloth, 3J. each : pos{ 
8vo, illustrated hoards^ 2s. each. 

The Leaden Caahet. 
Self-Condemned. 

That Ot her Perso n. 

Mrs. Juliet* Crow’n 8vo. cloth, ys. 6 d. 

HUTCHINSON (W. M.) —Hints 

on Colt* Breaking. Willi 25 lllusir.v 
_lions. Crown Svo, cloth, 6 <i. 

HYAMSON (ALBERT).—A His- 

tory of tbe Jews In Boglaod. With 
16 Portraits and Views and 2 M,ir>s 
Dmv 8vo. cloth. 45. 6^. net, _ 

HYATT (A. HOt Topographic^ 

Anthologies by* Poll 8vo. cloth, kiu 
lop. W. acl each; leather, gill edges 
3#. net each. ^ * 

The Charm of l<ottdon. 

The Charm of Edinburgh. 

The Charm of Venice. 

The Charm of Paris. 


INCHBOLD (A. C.l. The Road ..f 

No Return* Cio^a Svo. . 

INDOOR PAUPERS~H> u.M oi 

IHKN! CtoWII >V«>. It. : I .. ' 

I InTaTaN {tl E"R BT^RTT and 

HARTLEY A^PUBN.-Tbc Tear ui 

Kslee. Cr«*\vn «vi>, cl'^th. ^dl lop. r.-. 

rN”N K E E PE R’ S H A^N D^O I<. 

Trevok-D.u ikn Cr ^ 1 ., 

IRVING (WASHINOTONi,—Old 

Cbrl 5 tma$. bqu.trc lOnio. clnih. v. ilh 

i\ iiul. 

JAMES (C. T. C.).—A Romance of 

th e Qu een's Hound5. Cr. ^v<».cl. 

JAMES (O. W.). —Scfaggles: 

The 5 tory of a Sparrow. WiUi 
_IJIustralion*. Posi h\.>, doih, is. 

JAMESON (WTllI AMI.—My 

Dead Self. Posi hk'n.«.ii> •». 

JAPANESE~XRTISt~'iAr^ IN 
LONDON# Uy YosfiD) markino. With 
« Coloured iJlustmlhiiiv, Cr. fivo,ch^th. 
6 s. neL _ 

JAPP (Dr. A* M.U'-Dramatic 
I _ Pictures. CiiAvu mvh, cloili, s^i 

JEFFERIES iRICHARDirbyi’ 

The Life of the Fields. P t Sv.. 

cloth, H.Oil. ; LaKGk rvpr. M.Vt i'Apj j: 
Edition, (K>u 8vo. cloth, top, is i,t,t 
leather, siiU ed^cs. ys. net. Alsif a Xkv,* 
EnmON*. with 12 lllustratinluih Ci.l.mt 
by M. U. Ct.AkKS. crown Svo, cl Hh, 5^, 
iiel : parchment, 75, 6 d. net, 

The Open Air* Post 8vi». cloth, is. 6d.i 
Laroe Tv PL, Fink Paper EMnov.p.iU 
3 vo. cloth. Kill top, 25 . net: U.vUier. ^la 
edges, 35 . net A/so a N'EW Edition, 
WTih 12 lIlustr.Ttions In Colour^ hy Ri’tU 
DOLLSIan, crown Svo, cloth. 55, net ; 
parchment. 75. t>J. net. 

Nature near London. Crown hvo. 
bockram, ts.; post dvu.ci., 25. tj .; Large 
T%'PE, Fine Paper Edition, piiti nvo.cI,, 

gilt top, 2<. net; leather, gill citgc.s. iwL 
. 4 / 5 .' a Xkw ( uinoN. with u’llUis* 
tratians in Colours by J^tth Tollman, 
crown 8VO, cloth, 55, net; parchment, 
7 s. 6d, net. 

Pocket Richard Jefferies: 

Passages chosen by Alfred H. Hyait. 
Jhmo, cloth, gilt top, 2 j. net; leather, 
gilt top. 35. net. 

The Bulogyof Richard Jefferies, 

Hy Sir Walter HcbANT. Cr. iivo, cl.. 05. 


JEROME (JEROME K.U—Stage- 

Isnd. Will) 04 Illustrations by J. Her 
NAKD Partridge, Fcap 410. 15. 


JERROLD CTOM), Works by. 

Pom 8 vir. 15. e.atli; cloth, ij. <k(. each. 

The Garden that Paid the Rent* 
Househol d Horctcultu re* 

Our Kitchen Garden: The Plants We 
Grow, and How Wc Cook Them. Post 
8 vo. cloth, IS. net. 





i6 


CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


JOHNSTON (RO.—The Peril of 

an Empire* Crown dvo.ctoth. 

JONES 5WILLIAM,~ f‘s.A.). 

—Flntfev-Ring Lora: Historical, Le- 
^jcnd.iry, and Atiecdotal. With numerous 
Illustrations. Crown Svo, cloth 6^/. 

JONSON'S (BEN) Works. With 

Notes and BiOiJraphical Memoir by 
WiLLUil GiK>ORD. Edited by Colonel 
CuNN'iNOHAii, Three Vols., crown 3 vo, 
cloth. 35. 6*^. each. 


JOSEPHUS, The Complete 

Works of. Tr.inslatcd by Wili.ia.M 
WlUbTON. Contaioinj^ * The Antiquities 
of the Jews/ and ‘The Wars of the Jews.' 
WitlJ 52 lilustralions and Maps. Two 
Vols.. demy dvo, half-ciolh, I 2 f. 6d. 

KEATING (JOSEPH).—Maurice. 

Crown Svo, cloili, ii?. 

KEMPLINQ (WrBAILEV ).—The 

Poets Royal of England aod Scot* 
land: Original Poems by Royal anil 
Noble Persons. WTlIi Notes and o Ph<it<v 
gravure Portraits. Small 8vo» parchinc.it. 
6 t. net ; vellum, 7f. td. net. Also an 
Edition in Tuti King’s CLASSICS (No. 39). 

KERSHAW (MARK).—Colonic 

Facts and Fictions: Humorous 
5 ketches» Post 8vo» illustrated boards, 
a.f.; cloth. 2s. 6d. 


KINO (LEONARD W., M.A.).— 

A History of Babylonia and Assyria 
from Prehistoric Times to the 
Persian Conquest. With Maps, 
Plans, and lilustralions after all the 
principal Monumrnis of Ihc i’eriod. In 
3 volumes, royal Bvo. buckram. Each 
volume separately, i8t. net; or per set of 
3 volumes, if ordered at one time, £2 los, 
net. 

VuU 1.—A History of Sumer and 
Akkad: An accounl of the Early 
Races oi B.ibyloni.i from Prelusloric 
Times to about B.C. 2000. 

„ 11.—A History of Babylon from 
the Foundation of the Monarchy, 
about D.C. 2000, until the Conquest 
of Btbvlon bv Cyrus. B.C. 5P). 

IH.—A History of Assyria from 
the Karlust Period until the VMof 
Nineveh before the Mcdcs^ ILC.606. 


KINO (R. ASHE), Novels by. 

Post Svo, illustrated boards, 2 x. 

'The Wearing of the Green.' 
Passion's Slave. | Bell Barry. 

A Bravw'n Game. Crown 8vo. cloth. 
3t. 6</. : po^t illliif raN*d 


KINDS ANDQUEENS OF ENG¬ 
LAND. Bv h. O- IMiciUE and BASIL 
Phocier. Wilh 43 Illustrations. Small 
demy SvOj is. act. 


KINO’S CLASSICS (The). 

General Editor. Professor I. Gollancz, 
Litt.D. Printed on laid paper, i6ma, 
each with Frontispiece, gilt top. Quar* 
ter bound grey boards or red cloth, 
ss. 6 d. net each : qu.irter vellum, cloth 
sulcs, 2s, OJ, net each; three-quarter 
vellum. $ s. net each, 

Vo/uffifs no2; in course 0/ fuhhcalion: 

35 . Wine, Women, and Song: 

Mcdixval Latin Students' Songs. Trans¬ 
lated into English, with an Introduction, 
bv JOH>j Addinotom Symo.vds, 

36 » 37 . George Pettle's Petite PaL 
lace of Pettle his Pleasure. 
Kdiecd by Prof. 1 . GollaNCZ. 2 vols. 

38 . Walpole's Castle of Otranto. 
By Sir Waiter scott. With Intro¬ 
duction .ind Preface bv Miss SPURGEON, 

39 . The Poets Royal of England 
and Scotland. Original Poems by 
Kings and other UV>yAl and Noble 
Persons, c<*lk'ctcd and edited by W. 
Bailey Kesipling. 

40 . Sir Thomas More's Utopia. 

t>lited by KoUeRT SIKKLK, F.S.A, 

41 . tChaucer's Legend of Good 
Women. In MvJgrn £tis^ish, with 
Notes and Introduction by Professor 
W. W. SKEAT. 

42 . ^ Swift's Battle of the Books. 

Edited, with Notes .ind Introduction, by 
A. Guthkelcu. 

43 . Sir William Temple upon the 
Gardens of Epicurus, with 
other 17 th Century Garden 
Essays. Edited, with Notes and Intro¬ 
duction. by A. FOKbES SiKVKKING,F.S.A. 

44 . The Four Last Things, by Sir 
ftiOMAs More : together with A 
Spiritual Consolation and 
other Treatises by John Vihueh, 
Bishop of Rochester. Edited by Daniel 
O’Connor. 

45 . The Song of Roland. Translated 
from the old French by Mrs. Croslanu, 
With Inlroducrlon by iVof. Bkandin, 

46 . Dante's Vita Nuova. The 
Italian teat, with Dante G. Rossetti’s 
tr.inslation on opposite page. With Intro¬ 
duction .and Notes bv Prof. H. UelsneR. 

47 . tChauc 6 r*s Prologue and 
Minor Poems. In mfdgrn Eni^/ish, 
with Notes and Introduclion by Prof, 
W. W. SKKAF. 

46 .*tChaucer '8 Parliament of 
Birds and House of Fame. In 

tnodfrn Endssh, with Notes and Intro¬ 
duction by Prof. W. W. Skeat. 

49 . Mrs. Gaekell's Cranford. With 

Introduction by R. BimiLEY [OIINSON. 

50. tPearl. An English Poem of the 
Fourteenth Century. Edited, with ,t 
M odern Rendering and an Inlix^uction^ 
hv Pr'»fe^sor I. Goi.i ANCiJ. 

51 . 52 . King’s Letters. Volumes Ill. 
and IV. Ncwlv edited from the originals 
bv RoiiertStbelk. F.S.A. 

53 , The English Correspondenee 
of Saint fioniface. Translated and 
edited.v\ I th an Introductory* Sketch of the 
Life of St. Boniface. byiE. /. KYLIE, M.A, 



Ill ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 


17 


KINO’S CLASSICS (The>-^ «/»«'«</• 

56. Tho Cavalier to his 

Scvtnlccnth OiUury Love aonfis. 
Edited by F. SibowiCK. 

67. Asset’s Life of King Alfred. 

Edited by L. C. JAXK, M.A. 

58. Translations from the Jc® 

landlc* I3y oklkn, M-A, 

59. Tho Rule of St. Bonet. Tr.ins 

laicd by lOfiht Kcv. AbMuf GAsyCKT, 

60 . Daniers‘ Della and Dray ton’s 
‘ Idea.’ Edited by AKUSDbXL E*>l»AlLb, 

M.A. 

61. The BooU of the Duke of 
True Lovers. A Romance of the 
Court, by CltlUSTINE UE TlSAN, 
translated,with Notes and Introduction, 
by A 1 .ICE KEiiP-WELCU. 

62. Of the Tumbler of Our Ds.dy» 
and other Miracles. Tr.*inslaica, 

from the Middle French MSS., with 
Notes and Introduction, by ALICE 
KeMP-WELCll. 

63. The Chatelaine of Vergl. A 

Romance of the Court, translated from 
the Middle French, by Alice Kemp- 
Welch, w.IH introduction by u 
BrandIN. rh.D., and with the original 
Text, Edition Raynaud. 


EarlUf VclufnfS lu ihi 

I. Tho Lore of Books (The rhilohihinn). 
t, eSix DrfUhse of C^tdoron (Uiutiersid i 

TraoJ^'ation), * Douhh* vol.i ^ 
a Chronicle of jocd'llu of Omkcloiid. 

4. Tho Life of Sir TL 0 Tn:is More. 

6. Kikon Basllike. ^ ^ . 

d Ktiige* l.ettcrs : Alfred to the coming of 

thoTudi*r6. . 

7. Rings' Leuere : Froru the Tudore lo the 

l.ove Letters of Uenrr vni. ^ 
a tchHucer’e KnigluN Tnio . 

0. tClinuc**r'sMan of I.'^w>T«lo (Hmf.SKiiAT). 
lu* tCbaocer'e Prioress’A TaU* (Prof. 8 k**T). 

II. The itcmoQce ot Tulkc Kiui\*nriiie, 

1*. The Story of OuuM imd Phycho, 

13. Rvelyn’e Life 01 M.’irg'irvtUouoIrhIa 

14. Early Lives of DAUte. 

1& Tbo Falstaff Lett«pa. 

IE PoloQlui. By BDWARr) FitzGerald. 

17. MedioDvat Lore. 

1& The vision of Piera the PlowniAU (Prof. 

3kiat> 

10. ThoGulvs Hornbo’ik. 
so, oThe Nuo'e Rule, or Ancrco Rlwle. (Onublo 

21. Tho Memoirs of Itohcrt Cary, Earl of Mon- 
mnaCh. 

Early LWee of Charlemagne. 

Oieero'e * Frieii<1sli(|\' * Old Age,* aud 
*Sclpio*e Bream.' 

24 *Wordsirortb*»Prelude. (Double voL) 

2S. The Defence of Gucoevi»n>. 

26^27. browolQg's Meu aod Woioeo. 

2H. Poe's Poems. 

20 . Sliakespouro's Sonnets. 

30. George KlloPe Siba Mnrner. 
dl. Goldsmith's VUar i»f WiikcnoUI. 

32. Charles It^'Sde s Pi'^r Woffington. 

31 The Household of Sir Thomas More. 

H Sappho : One Huudred Lyrics. By Bliss 

0 AM£A ^4 

* Numhera 2. 00, and 24 are Double VolumcK 
aud Double Price. 

* Tho Olmucer Vots., and also No. SO. may be had 
tn iiltt I'Aper covers at la net each. 


KING’S LIBRARY FOLIOS 
(The). 

Tho Mlrrour of Vortuo In World- 
ly Grccitnea, or Tho Life of Sir 
ThoznDB More, Knight* By hi* 

son-ifi'law. WUI.IAM Kol UH. los- 6./. 
nel. (Seven copies ol this volume alone 
retn.iiii, and arc not lo be sold apart from 
seU.) 

Eikon Ba9llike,thc Portralcture 
of His Sacred Majestle In hla 
Solitudes and Sufferings* 

Edited by EmVAhU ALMACK. F.bA. 
£i IS. net, 

Shakespeare’s Ovid, being 
Arthur Ooldlng'8 Translation 
of the Hetamorphoses. Edited 
by W, H. D. Kou^i:. LiU.D. lu. 6J, 
net. 

Tho Percy Folio of Old English 
Ballads and Romances, bdiied 
by the Oenkkal Kiuiou, In fmir 
volumes at 4^4 4.1 the set. (Volumes 1 . 
and U. issued I HI. at Press; IV, in 
Preparation.) 

Note.— iWi y ihr nb.'Vt 

/fihc'S r/fH4ttn /t'p" PfUf, 

£y lyy. brf. ufi. _ 

KING’S LIBRARY QUARTOS 
(The'. 

Tho Alchemist. »>■ Bes Jonson. 
Ediud by H. C. Hart, ss- "el: lApan* 
esc Vellum, £t ir. nel. 

The Ouirs Hornbook, hy Thomas 
DSKKK g. EdPed by K. U. McKerrOW. 
54. net; Jap.aiicsc vtllum, lor. Od. ncU 

The Beggar’s Opera* By John Cay, 
E.Uieil by Hamiito.s MacLbod. $s, 
net : Jap.incsc vellum, loy. 6d. dcI. 


KIPLING PRIMER (A). Includ- 

ing Biographical and Critical Chapters, 
an Index lo Mr. Kipling’s principal 
Writings, and Bibliographies, By F. L. 
Knowles, With T>vo Portraits. Crown 
Svo, cloth, $y, 6 d, 

KNIG HT (WILLI AM and 
EDWARD*.—The Patient’s Vade 
Mecum: Mow to Oct Most Benellt 
Irom Medical Advice. Crown 8vo, 
doth. u. btf. __ 

LAMB’S (CHARLES) Complete 

Works in Prose and Verse, including 
‘ Poclry for Children ’ and ' Prince Dorus. 
Edilcd by R. H. Shepherd. With a 
Porlralls and Facsimile of the * Essay on 
Roast Pig.’ Crown Svo, cloth, 3 *- W. 
Tho Essays of Ella. (Both Series.) 
F'lXE Paper Eumox. pott 8vo, cloth, gilt 
tor* ii. oct: leather. elU cdf<e r.. net. 


LAMBERT (GEORGE). — The 
President of BoravUa Crown fivo, 
doth. sr. 6d. 



i8 CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


LANE (EDWARD WILLIAM). 

^Tkie Thousand and One Nights, 

commonly CA'lcd in Eniilaod The 

Arabian Nights’ Bntortaiu- 
menta* lllu^uated by W. HAHVbY. 
With Preface by Stanley Lane-Poolk. 
3 Vols., demy 8vo, cloth. 2Zs. («/. 

LAURISTOUl^PETER)^ the 

Painted Al n untaio. Cr. 8vo. cloth. Os. 

LEE (HOLME).—Legends from 

Fairy Land. With about 250 Illus¬ 
trations by KcGlNALD L. and Hohace 
J. Knowles, and an Introduction by 
H. H, Freemantle. Crown dvo, cloiii 
_Si. net. __ 

LEE5 (DOROTHY N,)-—Tuscan 

Feasts and Tuscan Friends- With 
12 I Justratjons. Crown 6vo. cl., 5;. net. 

Lehmann (Rr“c7y7^Harry 

Fludyer at Cambridge, and Conver* 
sationai hints tor Voung Shooters. 

Crown Hvo, l/.; cl<»lh, is. 6.:. 

LEIOH (HENRV S.).—Carols of 

Cockayne. Crown Kvo. buckiam, .st. 

LELAND (C. Q.)*—A Manual of 

Mending and Repairing. With Dia* 
.i*rani>. Crown hvu, clolh, 5^ 

CEPELLETIER (EDMONDJT^ 

Madome Sans-dene. lransl.iu<l by 
John de Villieks. Post cloin, 

3j. od.; illustrated boards, zs, ; POPULAR 
EDITION, medium nv <». <xi. 

rEYS“(JdH]^KT), Novels’ 

The Lindsays* Post Svo. illust, bds..2f. 
A Sore Temptation . Cr. Hvo, cl.. o< . 

LILBURKmaDAM).’—A Tragedy 

in Marble. Crown Hvo. cloth.^3f. 04 i._ 

LINDSAY (HARRY), Novels by. 

Crown 8vo. cloth. 3» each. 

Rhoda R oberts. I The Jacobite. 

Crown Hvo. cloth. 6s. each. 

Judah Pyecroft, Puritan. 

The Story of Leah. _ 

LINTON ( E. LYNN), W orks by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3 j. 6d. cjch ; p *-'! svo. ilfiiv 
trated boards, 2s. each. 

Patricia Kemball. I lone. 

The Atonement of Loam Dundas. 
The World Well Lost. 12 lilu^.^. 

The One Too Many. 

Under which Lord? Wiih j2 lihists 
*My Love.’ I Sowing the Wind. 
PaBton Carew. 1 Dulcie Rverton. 
With a Silken Thread. 

The Rebe l of the F amily. 

An Octave OC Priends. Crown Hvo. 
cloth, 3J. td. 

Sowing tho Wind. Cheap Edition, 
pc>st 8vo, clolh, li. net. 

Patricia Kemball. Popular Edd 
TJON, m edium hvo, od. _ 

UTTLE (M.)—At the Sign of the 

Burning Bush. Crown Hvo*cloth, <>s. 


LORIMBR (NORMA).—The 

Pagan Woman. Cr. Svo, cloth, 3^. 6d. 

LUCAS (ALICE). — Talmudic 

Legends, Hymns, and Parapbrases. 

Poat Hvo, haJi-parchnicnt, 2s» net- 

LUCAS lE. V.), Books by. 

Anna’s Terrible Good Nature, aod 

other Stories /or Children. With 12 
Illustrations by A. H. Buceiand, and 
Coloured End - Papere and Cover by 
F. D. nEi»FOKD. Crown 8vo, cloth, 61, 
A Book of Yersea for Children. 
Wiiu Cotoured liUc-pagc. crown Hvo, 
cloth, 6s. 

Three Hundred Oamea and Pas* 
times, by E, V. Lucas and Elizabeth 
Lucas. Pott 4to, cloth, 6j, net. 

The Flamp, and other Stories. 
Hovsi i6mo, cloth, is. ntu 

LUCY (HENRY W.),—Gideon 

FJeyce. Crown Hvo. cloth, 6d.; post 
Hvo. Illustrated boaidsc 2s. 

MACAULAY (LORD).—The HlV- 

tory of Bagland. Large Type. Fine 
Paper Edition, in 5 vols. pott Hvo. 
cloth, gilt lop, 2s. net per vol.; Icnthcr. 
gilt edi»es, $s. net per vol. 

MACCOLL (H UGH).—Mn 

Stranger’s Sealed Packet. Cr. Hvo, 
cloth, 3i. 6d, : post Hvo. ilUis. zs. 

McCARTHY(JUST]N)/Booksby. 

The Reign of Queen Anne. Two 

Vols.. demy Hvo. cloih. tis. each. 

A Hiatory of the Four Georges 
and or William the Fourth. 
Four Vols., demy Hvo, cloth, 125 each. 

A History of Our Own Times 
/roin the Accession ul Quccii Victoria to 
the General Election ot 1H80. Library 
Edition. Four VolJi., demy 8vo. cloth, 
izs. each.^-Alsb the Popular Edition, 
in Four Vols.. crown Hvo, cloth, 6s. each, 
—And the JUBlLBH EDITION, with an 
Appendix of Events to the end of 1S86, 
in 2 Vols.. dcniv Hvo, cloth, ys. (xi. each. 

A History of Our Own TlmeSt 
Voj. V., iHHo I' • the LiauiunU Jub lec 
Demv Hvo. cloth. I2x,; crown Hvo.cloth 6r, 
A History of Our Own TlmeSi 
V.>is. VI. an<l VII.. Horn lHi>7 to Acccs^ImU 
01 Edwanl VII, 2 Vols,,demy Hvo. cloth, 
24 f.: Clown Hvo, cloth. I2f. 

A Short History of Our Own 
Times, from the Accession of Queen 
Victor 1.1 to the Accession of King 
Eaw,fid VII. Mtw Edition, revised 
.ind enUiged. Crown Hvo, cloth, gilt 
t»»r* i i*iso the Popular EnirtoN. 
post Hvo, cloth, 25 . 6d .: and the Cheap 
Edition (to the y^r iRSo), med. Hvo, 6J, 

Large Ty^s, Finr Papkk Editions. 

PoU Hvo, cloth, gjit top, 2s. net per vol. t 
leather, gilt edges, $s. net per vol. 

The Reign of Queen Anne, in x Vot. 

A History of the Four Georges 
and of William lY.«m2vois. 

A History of Our Own Times from 
Accession 01 Q. Victoria to 1897, in 3 Vols. 












Ill ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W.C 


19 


McCarthy {justin>— 

"cfow^ 8 VO. clUh. : p^>^t bvo. P'C . 

boards, each : cMthJ^>, is.^d.c^ch. 

The Waterdale Neighbours. 

Mv Enemy‘s Daughter* 

A^air Baxon. I Dinley Boohford* 
Deai^adyDlsdaln. 1 The Dictator. 
Miss Mlsantbropo* With 12 lilusts. 

Donna gSixote. With ta lllustrationi. 

The Comet of a Season- 

Maid of Athens* With 12 UlusUationa, 

Red^Dia mondfl. > The R iddle Ring. 

^rown cU)th. is. (>d. c.ich. 

The Three Dlsgr^M. I Mononla. 

•The Right Honourable/ 

McCarthy and MRs. Campobll Praed. 

Crown fivo. cloth. 6 j. _ 

Jallan R^alston e. Cr.yv». cWth. 

McCarthy (J. H.), works by. 

The French Bevoiutlon. 

lucot Assembly, Vols.. 

demy 8 vo. doth, 12^. e.uh 

An Outline of the History of 
Irelend. Crown Bvo, u. 

Ireland Since the Union— 179 a- 

1B86- Crown 8 vo, cloth, bj. 

Hafix In Dondon* goldcloth. 3^.^- 

Oup Seneatlon Novm* Crown 8 vo. 
lx ,: clolh, II. M. 


MACDONELL (AONES). — 

Quaker Cousins* Post 8v o. boards.2;. 

MACHRAY (ROBERT), Novels 

jjy, Cr*‘wn 8v'0. rlolh, hi. each. 

A Blow over the Heart. 

The Private Dete ottve * 

Her Honour Crown xvo. doih. 31. 
The Mystery of Lincoln'e Inn* 

Crown 8vo. ciotts 6^.; CHEAP EdITIOS. 
picture cover, li. net. 

MACKAY (Dr. CHAS.).—Inte^ 

ludesand Undertones* Cr,^^v'o.clr>th. 6 <. 


MACKAY (WILLIAM). - A 

Mender ol Natg. Crow»svo.clr.th, 

IvTaCKENZIE jW. A.).-The 

Drexel Oream. Crnw-n >>v-.. cl-^th. Cj. 


MACLlSEPortr^tOallery (The) 
of Illustrious Literary Characters; 
65 Portraits by Daxikl Maclisv:: 
With Memoirs by William Bates, B.A. 
Crown Avo, cloth. _ 

MAGIC LANTERN, The, and its 

Management. By T. C. HtPWORTii. 

Cr. 8 v<*, 


With 10 Blusts. 


ij. i clolh. ij.Cvi. 


DoomfA^AiVaD?cEph<xJe. Crown MAGNA CHARTA: A F.-xcslmileof 
Dolly ; A Sketch. Crown Svo, if. Ihe Oiisin-'*'. 3 fl’*>yi 

Dlly Lass* Crown 8vo. ii.; cloth, W. Sc .ds cm blazoned in Gold .ind Colours, is, 

A Lsondon Degend* Cr.8vOiclot h, it. otf* _ 

M^TOTmBirQEORQE). MALLOCK H.). Works^by^. 


Works of ^anoy and imagination 

TcnVols., i6mo. clolh, gUt, in case, 2 m. j 
or separately. Grolier cloth, is, Orf, eai U. 
Also a New Issue Iq i6nio. cloth. pU 
top, ti. net per Vol.; leather, gilt top. is. 
net per Vot. 


VoL 


The MCEX Ropubllo* Svo, cloth. 

1,. OJ ; mustr.atcd bo.irdss 21.; LAPaK 
TYPE Fi.'Ce Paper Enin ox, pott Svo, 
clolh. gilt top, ar. net; leather, pit edges. 
IS. net. _ 

Poems* 41^* parchment. 81. 

Is Lite Worth Living? Crown Rvo. 

InicUr.im, Oi. 




i» 


I Within and Without—TH t 

Hidden Life. __ 

JI. THE DlSClPLK —THE GOSPEL V~ .g, THOMAS). 

m vSuN sl^e^KOS Of THE by K M. ItANRlNO. 1>,aM Svo. clotb. XL 

DAYS AND NlGKT«-A ROOK 7, a D I I FT D I TtV (PAUL 80(1 
OFDrbams—Roadside Forms JVlAK<JUtKl I j ^ oi«u 


--Poems for Children. 

IV. Parables — Ballads — Scotch 
^ V. & VI. Phantasies. CSongs. 

- VII. The Portent. 

, Viu. THE LIGHT Princess — The 
Giants Heart—Shadows. 

IX Cross Purposss-Goldex Key 

CARASOTN—LrrTl.EDAYLIOHT. 

X Thr Cruel Painter—The Wow 

o’Rjwen—Thr Castle—The 
Broken Swords—The Gray 
Wolf—Uncle Corneuus. 

Poetical Worke of George Wm- 
Donald* 2 Voh.. cr.Ero, buckrarD. 22^. 
Heather and Snow* Crown Svo. doth. 

$s. <i<L ; post 8to, illustrated boards, ar. 
Lilith* crown Svo. clolh. 6s. 

The Pocket Georg^TMaoDonald: 

Passages Chosen by X H. Htatt. i6mo, 
cloth gllt.ai, net; leather glU, net. 


VlCTORi, Novels by* 

Crown svo, cloth. each.^ 

The Disaster* Trans^a'.ed by h. Lk^ 
Vanity* Trunslated by K, S. kst. With 
Portrait Kroatisp icce. 

The Commune. Translated by F. Lhe$ 
Tind R B. Doi Gl C r. 8vo cloth, ts. 

MARIE DE MEDICIS and the 
Court of France in the XV 11 th Cen¬ 
tury* Translated irom the ol 

Lous Batiffol bv M ^RY King. With 
a Portrait. Demy 8vo, cloth, ys, M. net. 


MARLOWE’S Works^ including 

CoL CVXXINGHAM. Lr. Svo. clolh, 


MARSH (RICHARD). - A 

Spoiler of Men. Cr. ftvo. cloth, is. td. 



» 


MEADE (L. T.)t Novels by. 

A Soldier of Fortune. Crown 8vo. 
clolh, 3^. Cd.: po^t «vc>, illust. boards, 24, 

Crown 8v<>, cinti). 3*. fki. cnch. 

The Voice of the Charmer* 

In an Iron Qrlp* I The Siren. 
Dr* Rumsey^s Patient. 

On the Brink of a Chasm* 

The Way of a Woman. 

A Son of lehmaol* 

An Adventuress. | Rosebary* 
The Blue Diamond. 

A Stumble by the Way* 

This Troublesome World* 


AIEDICI (Livesof the EARLY)as 

told In their Letters. JiyjANKT Ross. 
With lllustmtion^ an i Facsimiles. Demy 
8vo. cl oth. lOf. ne t. [Pr/parin^. 

MEDIEVAL library” (The 

New). Small crown «vo, pure raji 
paper, boards. 5i. net per vuL ; psgskm 
witli clasps, ys- 6 d. net I'cr vol. 

1 . The Book of the Duke of True 
Dovers. Translated from (he Middle 
French or* Chhistink dx Pisan, with 
Notes by Alice Kemp-Welcii. Wood- 
cut Title and 6 Phologravures. 

2 . Of the Tumbler of our Lady 
and other Miracles. Translated 
trom the Middle Fiench of Gactjek DE 
CoiNCt. &c.. with Notesand Introduction 
byAt.lCE Kbup-Welch, Woodcut Title 
nr)d7 PhotoRraviires. 

3 * The Chatelaine of VeriJl* Trans¬ 
lated from the Middle French bv Alice 
Kfmp-WeLCH. with the original Text, 
and an Introduction by Dr. L. Drandin. 
Woodcut Title and 5 Phologravures. 

<• The Babees’ Book. Edited from 
Dr. FuuNlVALl/S Texts, with Notes, by 
Edith kicesrt* Woodcut Title and 6 
Photogravures, 


MELBA: A Biography. By 

Ag.ves M, Muhphv. Wiili Chapters by 
Madame Melra on The art oe Sing¬ 
ing and on The Selection OF Music as 
A Profession. Portraits. Views, and Fac- 
similes. Demy 8vo. cloth. i 6 s. net. 


MERRICK (HOPE). — When a 

Oirl'i Enffayed. Cr. 8vo. cloth. 3 f.6d. 

MERRICK (LEONARD), byi 

The Man who was Good. Crown 
8vo. cl., 3 r. 6rf. ; post 8vo. illusl. bds., at. 
Crown 8v(>. doth. it. ad. c.ich. 

Cynthia. | This Stage of Fools. 

METHVEN (PAUL).— 

_Influences. Crown Rvo. cloth, 6 t. 


MEYNELL (ALIC E).—The 

Flower of tlie Mind : a Choice 
among’ the Best Poems. Tn ]6mu. 
cloth, gilt, 2x, net; leather, 3«. net. 


MINTO (WM.),—Was She Good 

_or Bad? Crown 8vo. cloth, ts. Od. 


MITCHELL (EDM*), Novels by. 

Crown Evo, cloth. 3^. 6 d. each. 

The Lone Star Rush* With 5 lllusts. 
Only a Nigger* 

The Belforta of C^b». 

Crown 8vo. picture cloth, t1.lt backs, 2s, caciL 
Plotters of Paris* 

The Temple of Death* 

Towards the Sternal Snows. 


MITFORD (BERTRAM), Novels 

by* Crown «vo. cloth. 34. 6<f. each, 
Renehaw Fanning's Quest* 
Triumph of Hilary Blaehland* 
HavUand’s Chum* 










Ill ST, MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 


21 


MITFORD 

Cfiiwn cloth. 3*. (>{.', cMch ; pictuft cloth, 
ftal l)ack. 2K. c:\ci\. 

The Luck of Gerard Bidgeley* 
The King's Assegai. WhS) o musts. 

The Cua-Runner, Cj. Kvo, cl., 3 ?. 67,; 
cheap Krttium, mertiurii hvo.. <•{. 

Harley Greonoak's Charge. Crown 

fiV0T7E”S WORTH (Mrs.). — 

Hathercourt Rectory. Crown ^v *. 
ciuili, : pobt Svo, iilust. bo.irds, 2j. 

MON ^iFffTwVdTscotTT^ 

The Abdication: A Drama. With 7 
Etchin^d. [inpcnal ^lo, huckr;«m, 2ij, 

MO^RO\V‘'(\vri: 7 )T^Bohemia^ 

Paris of To-Day. With icO liiusts.by 
EDofAiinCrci.'Ku. SmallcletnvRvo.cl..(w 

MUDDOCK (J. E.), Stories by. 

Crown Svt>. cloth, 3*. 67 . each. 

Baallothe Jester. 

Young Lochlnvar« 

The Golden Idol._ 

Post 8vo, illustrated boards, ax. each. 
The Dead Man's Secret. 

From the Bos om of t he Deep. 

Stories Weird and Wondorfal. 

Po^t bvo, illu^t. boards, If.: n./. 

Maid Marian and Robin Hood. 
With I a Dlus. by Stanley L. Wood. Cr. 
8vo, cloth, 3f. (kt .; picture cl, flat back. zs. 


MURRAY (D. CHRISTIE), 

Novels by. Crown 8vo. cloth, ys. u/. 
each; post Svo, illustrated boards, 2f. each. 

A Life's Atonement* 

Joseph's Coat. Witii J2 Illustrations. 
Coals of Fire. With \ l 1 lustr.niiotkv 
Yal Strange. 1 A Wasted Crime. 
A Capful o* Nalls. 1 Hearts. 
The Way of the World. 

Mount Despair. | A Model Father. 
Old Blazer's Hero. 

By the Gate of the Sea* 

A Bit of Human Nature. 

First Person Singular. 

Bob Martin's Little Girl. 

Time's Revenges. 

Cynic Fo rtune. | In D irest Peril. 

Crown 8vo. cloth, 3?, OX each. 

This Little World. 

A Race for Millions. 

The Church of Humanity. 

Tales In Prose and Verse. 
Despair's Last Journey* 

V.C.; A Ch ronicle of Ca?>ti c Barfield. 
Verona's Father. Crown Svo, cloth, 6f. 
• His Olfim Ghost. Crown 8vo, cloth. 
3 ^. 6<f.: picture cloth, flat back, is, 

Joseph's Coat, Popular Edition, 

Sro, 6J. 

i^RRAY (D. CHRISTIE) and 

MENRY HERMAN, Novels by. 
Crown Svo. cloth, 35. 67 . each ; post Svo, 
Illustrated boards, zs, each. 

One Traveller Returns, 

The Bishops' Bible, 

PaulJones's Allas. With lllustraHons 
by A, PoRESTiKK and G. Nicolbt 


MURRAY (HENRY). Novels by. 


• 


I ^vo, chith. J<. CAvh. 


A Game of Bluff. 

A Song of Sixpence. 


NE^^'BOLT (HENRY). — Token 

_ from the Hnemv . Fcp. Hvo, pic, c<»v, iy. 

NISBET (HUME), Books by. 

‘Ball Upr Crown ^vo, 3f. 6,/.; 

po^it 8VO. iUuslr.ilcd bunrtis, is ; 
POPOl.Alt KlMTinx luirtium Svo, 67 . 

Dr. Bernard St. Vincent. Post 8vo, 
boards. 31. 


NORUAU (MAX).—Morj^anatic* 

h^llis.by Iv 1.17 M! Kill I.KK. Cl. AVM. 

NORRIS (W.~E.), Novef^by. 

Crown Svo, cU»lh. 3*. o 7 . each ; post Hvo, 
il)us(r;»1cd boards, jy. ench. 

Saint Ann's,_ \_ Billy Bellew, 

Miss Wentworth's Idea, Crown 8vo. 
cl.Uh, \s. 67. 


OUlOAf Novels by. Crown 8vo, 

cloth. 3 f. 67 . c.'tch ; post 8vo. illustraled 
boards. 3 j. each. 


Trlcotrln. 

Rufiino* 

Othmar. 

Frescoes, 

Wanda* 

Ariadne. 

Kascare), 

Chandoa. 

Moths. 

Puck, 

Idalia, 

BImbi. 

Slgna. 

Friendship^ 

QaUdsroy. 


A Dog of Flanders, 
Cecil Castlemalne's 
Gage, 

Princess Napraxlne. 
Held in Bondage. 
Under Two Flags, 
Folle-Farine. 

Two Wooden Shoos, 
A Village Commune, 
In a Winter City, 
Santa Barbara, 

In Maremma. 

Strathmore. 

Plpistrello, 

Two Ofifenders, 
Syriin. 


Crown bvo, cloih. 5?. (> 7 . ench, 

A Rainy June. I TheUassarenes, 
The Wa ters of E dera, 

Crown 8vo, picuirv cU>ih. lint back, it. each 
Syrlln. 1 The Water s of Edera, 
IvrrLAK Li»u lo.N^. iiicnium ^vo, 6f. cacu 
Under Two Flags, Moths, 

Hold In Bondage, Puck, 

S trath more. Tr 1 ootrl n. 

The Massarenes. Chandoa, 

Friendship. Ariadne. 

Two Little Wooden Shoes. 
Idalia, I Othmar, | Paaoarel, 
A Village Commune, 
Folle^Farlne. 

Two Little Wooden Shoes, Langr 

i YPh LduiON*, Fcap. 8 vo, viulh, ts. net; 
ic.ithcr, If, (\i, net, _ 

WlBdomi Wit, and Pathos, selected 
from ihe \V<»rks of OUliu bv F. SYDNEY 
Morris, Fink Fapsr Edition, pott 
fivo. cloth, Cilt top, 2f, net ; leather, cik 
tdges, 3f,oct. 

OHNEtlQEOlRiES), Novels by, 

Po<it 8vo, illustrated boards. 2f. each 
Dr. Ram eau, | A L ast Love. 
A Weird Gift, Crown Hxes, cloth, 31. 67 , 
pnsi 8vo, ilmstrateci boards, zs. 







22 


CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


OHNET (QeOROeS)-coniinu<d. 

Crown 8vo, cloth. 35. tU. each. 

The Path of Glory. 

Love's Depths. 

The Money-maker. 

The Woman of Mystery* 

The Conqoeress. 

OLIPHANT (Mrs.K Novels by. 

Post 8vo. illustrated hoards, 2s. each 

The Primrose Path. 

The Greatest Heiress in England 

’jf^Thlteladies. Crown 8vo. cloth, with 12 
lliiisiraticitis. 6 d. ; post 8vo, bds., zs. 
The Sorceress . Crown 8vo.cloth. j;s 6 i/, 

OSBOURNE (LLOYD), Stories 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth, ^s. Od. each. 
The Motormaniaeg. 

Three Speeds Forward. With 
illustrationN. 

0SHAUrjHNE5SY {ARTHUR), 

■Vlusic & Moonllgbt. Kop sy,. cl.. 7 f.t>,/. 

PAIN (BARRY).-Enza’s Hus¬ 
band. Kc.ip.,8vo. n. : rloth. l». 6< 

PANDURANG HARI; or, 

Memoirs of a Hindoo. With Preface 
hy Sir BARTi.h hKtUE. Post 8vo, illus¬ 
trated boards, is. 

PARADISE (The) or Garden of 

the Holy Fathers: Histories i>f the 
AiiclioriteS. Kccluscs, Canohitc'', .Monks, 
and Ascetic Fathers of the Dv>ert.s of 
Eitypt, between about a.d 250 and 400. 
Compiled bv AxHAX.ASrcs, Pau.adius. 
St. Jkrome, and others, T^ansl.ited 
from the Syriac, with an Intro- 
<liic(ion. by E. A. Wallis Bppok, Litt.O. 
With 2 FronUspicccs. 2 voU. large crown 
8 vo. buckram, 155. net. 

PARIS SALON, The Illustrated 

Cntalo^ue of the. With about soojUus* 
trations. Published annually. Dy8vo. 31. 

PAYN (JAAIE5), Novels by. 

Crown 8VO. cloth, 31. 6 d. each ; post Kvo, 
illustrated bor^rds, 2c. e.'ich. 

Lost Sir Massingberd. 

Tha Clylfards of Ciyffe. 

A County Family. 

Loss >^lack than We're Painted. 
Py Proxy. 1 For Ca&h Only. 

^;plrit 9 . I Sunny Stories. 
A Confidential Agent. 

A Grape from a Thorn. 12 lllusts. 
The Family Scapagrnce. 

Holiday Tasks. | At Her Mercy. 
The Talk of the Town. 12 Jilusts. 
The Mystery of Mirb*-ki^e. 

The Word and the Will. 

The Burnt MlUion. 

A Trying Patient. 

GwencloiJnc's Harvest. I 


PAYN (JAMBS)— continued. 

Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 

Humorous Stories. I From Exile. 
The Foster Brothers. 

Married Beneath Him. 
Bentlnck's Tutor. 

IValter's VFord. 1 Fallen Fortunes. 
A Perfect Treasure. 

Like Father, Like Son. 

A Ififoman's Vengeance. 
Carlyon's Year. [ Cecil's Tryst. 
Murphy's Master. 

Some Private Views. 

Found Dead. | Mirk Abbey. 
A Marine Residence. 

The Canon's Ward. 

Not Wooed. But Won. 

Two Hundred Pounds Reward. 
The Best of Husbands. 

Halves. I What He Coat Her. 
Kit: A Memory. I Under One Roof, 
01 ow«Worm Tales. 

A Prince of th e Bl^ood, 

A Modern Dick Whittington. 

Crown 8va cloth, with Portrait of Author, 
Zs.6d.; picture cloth. Hat back, 2s. 

The Burnt Million. Cuiup Edition. 

post Kvo, cloth, is. net. 

Notes from the * News.’ Crown dvo, 
cloth, IS. 6 d. 

PorcLAR EorrION’S, medium 8vo, 6d. «ach. 

Lost Sir Masslngberd. 

Wait er's Word, f By Proxy. 

PAYNE (WILL). — Jerry the 

Dreamer. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3r. 6 d, 

PaULiMARQARETA.)—G entle 

and Simple. Crown Svo, cloth,3^. 6d«; 
_pem Kvo, illustrated hoards, is, 

PEARS (CHARLES)*—From the 

Tliamcs to the Seine. With 40 Hlusts, 
in Colours and Monochrome. Large 
f< Ap. 4to, cloth. IS5. 67 . net. (Ptrf'arirtg* 

PENNELL - ELMHIRST (Cap¬ 
tain E.).—The Best of the Fun. 

With 8 Coloured llluslrations and 48 
others. Medium Svo. cloth. 6f. net. 

PENNY (F. E,), Novels by. 

Crown Svo, cloth, M. e.ich. 

The Sanyasl. | TheTea Planter. 
Castean d Creed. | Inevit able Law. 

Crown Svo, cloth. 6^, t ;ich. 

Dllys. I Dark Corners. 

The Unlucky 

The Tea-Planter. Poj'OLar Edition, 
mcdiMni, Svo Od. f 

(AUC^, Novels by. 

Idolatry. Crown 8vo. clo th, 6j. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 34 CJ. each. 

A Free Solitude. 1 East of Boea. 
The y/aters of Destruction. 

Red Records. 

The Stronger Claim. 

Pom.AK Em I IONS, medium Svo, 6 d, each. 
The Stronger Claim. 

The Waters of Destraotlon. 




Ill ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 


23 


PETIT HOMME ROUGE (Le), 

Looks by, Btmy ^vo, cloth, 75 . 6c/. net 
each. 

The Court of the Taileries, 1852- 
1870. With a FronU?piece. 

The Favourites of Henry of 

With Six P«»rtfaiU. _ 

PHELPS (E. S.).—Jack the 

Flshermaa. lliusirated by C. W. 
Reed. Cross*n Evo. cloth, u. (•*!. _ 

PHIL MAY^S Sketch-Book: 54 

Cartoons. Crown folio, cloth, 2 u(H. 

PHIPSON (Dr. T. L.).-Famous 

VioUniftts and Floe Violins. Ciiiwn 
8vo, cloth. 5 i, _ 

PICTURE-MAKING, Notes on 

the Scieoce of. Lv C. J. Hoc.mks 
M.A. With Photoi*r.Tvurc Frontispiece. 
Dcniyflvo, cloth, 7 J. 6J. oct. 


PRICE (E. C.). — Valentina. 

Cfiiwn Evo, cl(*lh, tJ, 

PROCTOR (RICHARD aT7, 

Work* by. Crown Kvo.cloih. 51. 6d, each. 
Easy Star Lessons. Wliu Star Maps 
I'jr everv iViylit in ilic Year. 

Flowers of the Sky. W^ith s 5 in«sU. 
Pamtllar Science Studies. 
fiAytterles of Time and Space. 
The Universe of Suns. 

Saturn and its System. With iy 
•Meet Plates. Uceny «vo, cloth, 6s. 
Wa^os and Wants of Science 
workers. CiownSvo. is, 6;. _ 

PRYCE (RICHARD). — Miss 

MaxwelPs Allecttons. Crown »v<> 
cloth, yt. fui .: ih)$( t>vo, illust. b<jards. zs. 


PILKINOTON (L. L.).—Mallen- 

der^s Mistake. Crown ch«th. 


PLANCHfe (J. R.L—Songs and 

Poems. Edited by Mrs. M.^lkak.ves^ 
Clown Svo, cloth, 6 t. 


PLAYS OF OUR FORE- 

FATHERSi end some of the Trad!- 
tionsttpoo which they were loiinded. 

By C. M, Gaylly, LL.U. With numerous 
illustriUon’v Royal Svo,cl*»th. 12$. 6.^/. net. 


PLUTARCH’S Lives of Illus¬ 
trious Men. With Liieot Flutakch 
by J. and W. Lang HORNE, and For 
traiU. Tnvo VoIs., 8vo, halt>cloth, 

P0E^STED”QAR ALLAN) Choice 

Works; Poem*, Stories, Essays. 

Wllh an Introduction by ChaRLK^ 
Baudelaire. Crown Svo, cloth, u. 6J. 


P0LL0CK(W.H.).—TheChnrni. 

and Other Drawfo^-Room Plays 

By Sir Walter Besant aiui Walter 
H. POLLOCIL With $0 must rations. 
Crown Sto, cloth, $ 5 . 6 d. 

POTTS (HENRY). — His Final 

Flu tter. Crow'n ^vn. cloth, o.«. 

POWDER - PUFF (The): 3 

Ladies' Breviary. By ^ Fra.vz Blei 
_Fcap. 8vo, cloih» 32.6^. 


PRAED (Mrs. CAMPBELL), 

Novels by. Post 8vo. illas. bo;«rds,2i. ea. 

The Romance of a Station. 

The Bool of Cou ntess Adrian, 
CrowD cloth, 32. 6d, each : post 
ill us Ira ted boards, Zs. each. 
Outlaw and Lawmaker. 
Christina Chard* 

Hra. Tr^aakts s. With 8 mustradons. 
Crown 8VO, cloth, $s, 6rf. each. 
Nulma. I Madame laan. 

*Aa a Watch In the Night/ 

The Lost Earl of Bila n. 

Christina Chard. Cheap Edition 
post 8vo, cloth, u. net. 


RAB AND HIS FRIENDS —By 

Ur. JOHK BRC>wn\ bqo.ve lOmo. with 
Fronh^piccc. cloth, 1/ net. 


RAPPOPORT (A. Sm M.A.).- 

The Curse of the RomsDovs: A btncly 
of the kei^ris i>i i^.^rs Paul L .tikI 
Alexander 1 . of Russia, Wirh 

23 lllubtrations. Demy svo, cloth, l 6 y. iKi, 

READERS (CHARLES) Novels. 

Collected LlUKAKV Editio.v, lA$<vcnlc<M 
Volumes, crown Svo, cloth, yj. 6 J 

Pe^ WofhngtOD; and Christie 
JohnEtone. 

Hard Gash. 

The Cloister and the Hearth. 

Willi .1 Preface bv Sir WALTER 

* It is Never Too Late to Mend/ 
^he Course of True Love Never 
Did Run Smooth ; and Sintfle- 
heart and Doubleface. 

The Autoblo^aphy of a Thief: 
Jack of all Trades; A Hero and 
a Martyr; The Wandering Heir. 
Love Me Little, Lovo Me Long. 
The Double Marriage. 

Put Yourself In His Place. 

A Terrible Temptation. 

GriffithCaunt. | A Woman-Hater. 
Foul Play, I A Simpleton. 

The Jilt: and Good Stories of Man 
and other Animals. 

A Perilous Secret. 

Readlana; and Bible Gharaoters. 

Also In Twenty-one Volumes, post 8 vo, illus^ 
traicd bonrd^ ±s, each. 

Peg Woffington. | A Simpleton. 
Christie Johnstone. 

Mt is Never Too Late to Mend.* 
The Course of True XK>ve Never 
Did Run Smooch. 
Ancobio^aphy of a Thief; Jack 
of all Trades; James lAambert. 
Love Me Little, Lovo He Long. 
The Double Marriage. 

The Cloister and the Hearth. 

A Terrible Temptation. 

Hard Cash. I Readiana. 

I Foul Play. 1 Griffith Gaunt. 










24_ CHATTO & W INDUS, PUBLISHERS, 

RBADB (CHARLEYS)— continutd. 


Post 8vo, Illustrated Br>.irds. zi. each. 

Put Yourself In His Place* 

The Wandering Heir* 

A Woman-Hater* 

Slngleheart and Doubleface. 
Good Stories of Man* &c. 

The Jilt; and other Slones. 

A Perilous Secret* 


Large Type, Vise Paper Editions. 
Pott 8vo, cloth, gilt top, IS. net each ; leather, 
gilt edges. 3;. net each. 

The Cloister and the Hearth* With 
32 Itluslralions by M. D. Hewkhlune. 
*lt Is Never Too Late to Mend** 

Popular Editions, medium 8vo, (d. each. 

The Cloister and the Hearth* 

* It Is Never Too Date to Mend** 
Foul Play* I Hard Cash. 

Peg WoflSngton; and Christie 
Johnstone* 

Griffith Gaunt. 

Put Yourself In His Place* 

A Terrible Temptation. 

The Double Marriage* 

Dove Me Dittle, Dove Me Dong* 
A Perilous Secret* 

A Woman-hater. 

The Course of True Dove. 


The Wandering Heir. Large Type 
Edition, fcap.tjvo, cloth, ix. net; leather, 
rx. 6 d. net. 

The Cloister and the Hearth. 

With 16 Photogravure and 84 halftone 
Illustrations by Matt B. Hkwerdine. 
Small 4to, cloth, 6t. net.—Also the 
St. Martin's Illustrated Edition. 
with 20 Illustrations in 4 Colours And 
xoln Black and White by Byam Shaw. 
R.I, Demy 8vo, cloth, i2x. 6J.; parch* 
ment. i6x, neu 

RICHARDSON (FRANK), Novels 

by* Crown 8vo. cloth, ‘kx. each. 

The Man who Dost his Past* With 
50 Illustrations by To.M Hrowne, RI. 

The Bayswater Miracle* 


Crown 8VO, cloth, 6x. each. 

The King's Counsel. 
6 emi*aociety* 

There aDd_^Gk*_ 

RIDDELL (Mrs.), Novels by. 

A Rich Man's Daughter* Crown 
8vo, cloth, 3x. OJ. 

Weird Btorles* Crown 8vo, cloth, 
3X.6J.; post 8VO, picture boards, ar. 

Post 8vo. illustrated boards, ix.eacb. 

The Uninhabited House* 

Prince of Wales's Garden Party. 
The Mystery in Palace Gardens. 
Fairy Water* | Idle Tales* 
Her Mother's Darling* 


RIVES (AMELIE), Stories by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth. 3X. Od, each. 

Barbara Dorlng* 

Merlel: A Love Story. 


ROBINSON (F. W*). Novels by. 

Womon are Strange* Post 8vo 
illustrated bo.irds. zs. 

The Hands of Justice. Crown 8vo, 
cloth. 3x. bj.: post 8vo, IMust. bds., ax. 
The Woman in the Dark* Crown 
8 VO, cloth, 3x. 6 d.; postSvo. illusL bds., is. 


ROLFE (FR.), Novels by. 

Crown 8vo. cloth. 6.t each. 

Hadrian the Seventh. 

Don Tarquinlo* 

ROLL OF BATTLE ABBEY, 

THEt A Li^t of Principal Warriors who 
came from Normandv with Willi.iin the 
Couquvfcir. »o66 In Gold and Colours. 

ROSENQARTEN(A.).-A Hand¬ 
book of Architectural Styles* Trans* 
latcd by W. Collett-Sandars. With 
630 Illustrations. Cr. Svo, cloth. 75. 6 d. 

^”ss (ALBERT).—A Sugar 

Princess. Crown Svo. cloth, 3*. 6 J. 

ROWS EL L (MARY 

Monsieur do Paris. Crown Svo, 
_ cloJh. 3f. ()d. 

RUNCIMAN (JAS.), Stories by. 

Schools and Scholars. Post 8vo, 
cloth, 2x. 6 d. 

Skippers and Shellbacks. Crown 
8vu, cloth. 3 f. Od, 

RUSKIN SERIESlThe). Square 

i6ino, cl., with coloured tops And decor¬ 
ative End-papers, Trontis pieces, and 
Title«5. Is. net cnch. 

The King of the Golden River. 

By John Ruskin. llluslrated by 
PiciiARD Doyle. 

Bab and hla Friends* DyDr* John 
Brown. 

Old Christmas* By Washington 

iKViNf;. 

Fairy Tales from Tuscany* By 1 . 

M. Anduwton. 

Ruskin as a Religious Teacher* 

By F. W. P'ARRAK, D.D. 


RUSSELL (W. CLARK), Novels 

by. Crown Hvo. cloth, 3x. 6t/, each; 
pnst Svo. illustrated boards, ax* each; 
chuti. 2x. 6 d. each. 

Round the Galley-Plre. 

In the Middle Watch. 

On the Fo'k'sle Head* 

A Voyage to the Cape* 

A Book for the Hammock; 

The Mystery of the ' Ocean Star/ 
The Romance of Jenny Harlove* 
The Tale of the Ten* 

An Ocean Tragedy* 

My ShipmateDoulse. 

Alone on a Wide Wide Sea. 

The Good Ship 'Mohock** 

The Phantom Death* 

Is He the Man 7 | Heart of Oak* 
The Convict Ship* 

The Dast Entry* 




A Tale of Two TunnelSi 
The Death Ship. 

The ‘ Pretty Polly/ \Vith 12 Illustra¬ 
tions hv 1 j. E. Roiifrtsov. 

Overdue. | Wrong Bide Out. 

The Convict Ship. PoruLAU Epition* 
jijcdium 8vo. ___ 

RUSSELL (HERBERT). —True 

Bluc» Crown Svo> cloth, ^s. _ 

RUSSELL (DORA), Novels by- 

Crown &VO, cloth, each ; picture 

doth, flat hack. ts. nut each. 

A Country Sweetheart. 

^Tho Drlf^of^Fate._ 

RUSSELL (Rev7JOHN) and his 
Out-uf»door Life. Py K. \\\ L. 
JJAVifcS. With Illustration^ Cijiourcd 6y 
hand. Royal 8vo. cloth. net. 

RUSSIAN BASTILLE, THE 

(The Fortress of Schluessclbore), llv 1 . 
P. YOUVATSIIEV. Translated by S. 
RArPOPORT. M.A. With t6 Pialcv 
Deiuv Svo. cloth. 7s. 6J. net. 

SAINT AUBYN(ALAN). Novels 

by. Crown Svo, doth. Si. Cm/, cadi; po^t 
Svo. illustrated boards 3$ each. 

A Fellow of Trinity. With a Kotc 
by 01 . 1 VKP \Ven‘I>i*:i.L 
The Junior Dean- 
Orchard Dameroi. 

The Master of St. Bcnedict*0- 
In the Face of the World. 

To His Own Master. 

The Trem lett D iamonds- 

Crown Svo, cloth, ss, OJ. each, 

Tho Wooing of May. 

Fortune's Oate. 

A Tragic Honeymoon. 

Gallantry Bower. 

A Proctor's Wooing. 

Bonnie Maggie Lauder. 

Mrs. Dunbar's Secret. 

Mary Unwin, wuh w lituet^atione. 

SAINT JOHN (BAYLE). — A 

Levantine Family. Cr. Svo. cU y, f>d. 

SALA (Q. A.).—Gaslight and 

Daylight. Po&t Svo.illustrated boards.gj. 

SCOTLAND YARD, Past& Present 

By Ex-ChieMn$pector Cavan ACil. Post 
Svo. llhistratM board?^ 2<, : ch»ih. 2s, 6</. 

SELINCOURT (HUGH DE).— 

Oxford from tbe Inside. With 8 
coloured KhiMrationi^ and 4 in. mono* 
chrome by YosHio Markino. Crown Svo, 
cloth, 6^. net. _ 

SERGEANTCADELINE), Novels 

by. Crown Svo. etotiu Od. cacii. 

Unaer False Pretences* 

Dr. Endic ott's Experim ent. 

The Missing Elizabeth. Crown Svo. 
cloth, 6$. 


ST. MARTIN’S LIBRARY (The). 

Ill piH.kt.1 ^i7l. ctoth. >*111 tc*p. 2s, net pur 
Vol. : leather, ^ilt vd.itts, 3^. net per Vol. 
By Sir Waltbr Bk^akt. 

London. I Westminster. 
Jerusalem. liy Decant .ind paimkr. 
All Sorts and Conditions of Mon- 
Sir Richard Whittington. 
Gaspard de Collgny. 

By BoCLACCio. 

The Decameron. 

Bv PontUT PROWKING. 

Plppa Passes; And Men and Wo* 
men. With 10 lllustrjiiund in Cnioi.r:! 
by L. P. Brick i>Ai u. 

By Roukkt Bi ciiANAX. 

The Shadow of the Sword. 

liy 11 At I. UAINK. 

Tbo Deemster. 

hv SVil MK CcM hlXS, 

The Woman in White. 

Jly DANlEt. Uki-OP. 

Robinson Crusoe. With 3? Ulus* 
tr.itioux by G. Lri’ikshank. 

By CilAKLKt. DlCKKNS. 
SpeOChes. With portrait. 

By Av<tTis D(»hsoN. 

Eighteenth Century Vignettes. 

i lirvu Senes, each hiovtraUsl. 

By W. S. Gn.nKRT. 

Original Plays. Thrvt< svrlcs. 

By Thomas Hardv 

Under the Orconv/ood Tree. 

|;v hKLi ItAKiL. 

Condensed Novels. 

Mliss, The Luck of RoarIngCamp, 
ai.d oU.ei Storiis. Wiltj Porir.iit. 

Bv Ol.IVKK WKNObM. Ihil.MV'- 
The Autocrat of the Breakfast* 
Table, iilustrutcd bv J. u. 

Coiurikd hv A. n.' HvaTT. 
TheCharm of London: An Aiitho!u;;y. 
Tho Charm of Edinburgh. 

The Charm of Venice. 

The Charm of Parts. 

Hv iBCIfARI) I^^f-PERIES. 

The Life of the Fields. 

The Open Air. 

Nature near London. 

Uy ciiAiH.KS Lamb. 

The Essays of Ella. 

By LORI) MacatlaY. 

History of England, in 5 Volumes. 

ily JtlMlN Mccakthy. 

Tbe Reign of Queen Anne. In i Vol, 
A History or the Pour Georges 
and of William IV*. in 2 Vols. 

A History of Our Own Times from 

Accession 01 Q. Vietohn to iSyy. in 3Vols, 
By Gkorge MacDokai i>. 

Works of Faneyand Imagination, 
in 10 Vols. i 6 nu». (For List, see \\ ly,) 
By.W. H. Mallock, 

The New Republic. 

By OnnA. 

Wisdom, Wit, and Pathos. Sc* 

keted by F. Syuney Morris. 

Bv Charles Krapk. 

The Cloister and the Hearth. With 
IlluMrations hv M. H. Heweroine. 
'It is Never Too Late to Mend.' 


Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C 25 


RUSSELL (W. CLARK)-cfl>tti'iutJ. 
Cri>wii «vc>, d^'lh. iJ. Uf. each. 





26 


CHATTQ & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


ST. MARTiN '5 LIBRARY — continued. 
By Robert L<.vis Sten-exson. 
iDlHDd Yoy&^e. 

Travels with a Donkey. 
Memories and Portraits^ 
Vlrglnibus Pnerlsque* 

Men and Books. 

New Arabian Nights. 

Across the Plains. 

The Merry Men. 

Prince Otto. 

In the South Seas. 

Essays of Travel. 

Weir of Hermlston. 

The Silverado Squatters. 
Collected Poems. 

By H. A. TaINE. 

History of English Literature, in 
4 Vols. With 32 Portrj^its. 
iiy Makk twain.- Sketches. 

By Walton and Con ON. 

The Complete Angler. 

By Walt Wmiiman. 

Poems. Selected and Kdiled bv W. M ; 
KossETTL With Portr;ijr. 


SEYMOUR (CYRIL), Novels by. 

Crown 8vo. cloth. 0 .». each. 

The Magic of To-Morrow, 
ror^ot ChnoB. 

SHARK SPEAR E LIBRARY^ 

l^ART I 

THE OLD-SPELLINQ 
SHAKESPEARE. 

With the spelling of the Quarto or the 
Folio as the basis of the Tcjct, and all 
changes marked in he.avy type. Edited, 
with bnef Introductions and Notes, bv F 
]. Furnivall. M.A.. D.Litt.».nDd P.’W. 
Clarke, M.A, Demy 8vo, cloth, 

6d. net each Play : or Library Edition, 
pure rag paper, half-parchment, 5f. net 
per Play. A Jtsl of the volumes already 
published or in the press may be had, 
Part II. 

THE SHAKESPEARE CLASSICS. 

Small crown 8vo, quarter-bouud antique 
grey boards, zs. 6d. net per vol.; whole 
gold-browD velvet persian. 4s. net 
per vol .; also a Limited Edition on 
larger paper, half parchment, gilt tops 
Sr. net, per vol. Each volume with 
Fiontispiece. 

Volxtmes fuhUshcd cr in prefaration. 

f. Lodge'0 * Rosalynaethe 
original of Shakespeare's *As 
You Like Edited by W. W. 

(iKEG, M A. 

2. Greene's ‘ Pandosto/ or ‘ Doras- 
tus and Fawnla': the criminal 
of Shakespeare's * Winter’s 
Tale.’ Edited by P G, TiK'Ma^' 

3. Brooke’s Poem of * Romeus and 
Juliet’s the original of Shake¬ 
speare's ^Borneo and Juliet.’ 
l:>htcd by P. A. Uan'IKL. Modernised 
and re*cdi*cd bv I. t Mt’SR^. 

4. *Ttae Troublesome Reign of 
King John’: the Play rewritten 
by Shakespeare as ^King John.' 

Edited by F. J. FUKMVAI.L, D.I.dt. 


i2. 


[SHAKESPEARE LIBRARY-r^«A 

THe SHAKESPEARE CLASSICS— 

5,6. ^‘Tho Riotory of Hamlet’: 
With other Documents illustrative of 
the sources of Shakspeare's Play, and an 
Introductory Study of the Legend OF 
Hamlft bv Prof. I. Gollancz. 

7 * The Play of King Lelr and His 
Three Daughters ’: the old play 
on the subject of King Lear, 
Kdded by Sidney Ler, D.Lift. 

^The Taming of a Shrew’: 
Being the old play used by Shakespeare 
in ‘The Tamiogof the Shrew.' Edited 
bv Professor F. S. BOAS. M.A, 

9. The Sources and Analogues of 
’ A MidsummerNlght’s Dream.’ 
Edited by FraxK SiDGWiCK. 

20. ’The Famous Victories of 
Henry V.’ 

ti. ’The Mensechml’: the original 
of Shakespeare's ’Comedy of 
Errors.’ Latin text, with the Klixa- 
bethan Translation. Edited by W. H. D. 
RocsK. Litt.D. 

’ Promos and Cassandra ’: 
the source of ’Measure for 
Measure.’ 

13. ’ Apolonius and Stlla *: the 

sr»urcc of ‘Twelfth Night.' Edited by 
Morton Luce. 

14. ’The First Part of the Conten¬ 
tion betwixt the two famous 
Houses of York and Lanoas* 
ter/ and ’ The True Tragedy of 
Riobard, Duke of York’: the 
originals *•( the second and third*parts of 
•King Henry VI/ 

15. The Sources of’The Tempest.’ 
10. The Sources of ’Cymbellne/ 

17. Th< Sources and Analogues 

of ’The Merchant of Yenloe.’ 

E<Hted by Prolc'csor 1 . Oollancz, 
iH. Romantic Tales : the sources of 

* i lie 'l^vo Gentlemen of Verona,* * Merry 
Wives/ ‘Much Ado about Nothing,' 

* All's Well that Ends Well.* 

19,20 Shakespeare’s Plutarch: the 

sources of ' Julius Caesar/ ‘Antony and 
Clcopalra,' * Conolanus,’ and ‘Timon.* 
Edited by C. F. Tvckkr B rook B, M.A, 

Part HI. 

THE LAMB SHAKESPE^ARE 
FOR YOUNG PEOPLE. 

With lUusIrations and Music. Based on 
Mary and Charles Lamb's Tales from 
S lfAKKSFEARFs and edited by Professor 
I.Gollancz, who has inserted within the 
setting of the original prose those scenes 
and passages from the Flays with which 
the young reader should early become ac. 
quaintvd. The Music arrnneed by T. 
SIaskfll Hardy. Imperial i6mo,cloth, 

I?. 6 d. net per vol.; leather. 2r. 6J. net per 
vol.; Special School Edition, linen, $d. 
net per vol. 

I. The Tempest, 
n. As You Like It. 
in. A Midsummer Night’s Dream, 

IV. The Merchant of Venice, 

V. The Winter’s Tale. 

VI. Twelfth Night. 


SHAKESPEARE LIBRARY-. 

Tat LAMB iHAKKbk*fcAPK— 

VII. Cymbellne. 

Vlll. Borneo and Juliet. 

IX, Uacbeth. 

X. Mucb Ado About Notnlng- 

XI. A Life of Shakespeare for the 
Young* 

XIJ. An BveniQg with Shake¬ 
speare: 10 Jjramatic fabluiux t<»r 
Youc)^ People. WJth Music b>' T. 
MASKb'Li. Hardy, and illustrations. 
Cloth, zs. nvt; leather. 3#. 61^. ncl ; 
line n, li, ^d. n et._ 

Part IV 

SHAKESPEARE'S ENGLAND. 

A senes ot volumes Ulustraiive 01 the lae. 
thought, and letters of Enulandin the lime 
of Shakespeare. The first volumes arc— 

Robert Laneham'fi Letter,dcscribin|* 
part of the Enterlainuxut given to 
Queen Eliza hcih at Kc ml worth Castle in 
157s. With Introduction by Dr, FURKI- 
VALL, and niusirations. Demy Svo. 
cloth, 5t. net. 

The Rogues aud Vagabonds of 
Shakespeare's Youth: repnidsof 
Awdelcy’s * tralcrnliyc of Vavabonde\' 
Harman's'Caveat forCommooCursetors* 
Parson Haben*sor Hybcrdync's ' bermon 
in Praise of Thieves and Thievery*,’ &c. 
With many woodcuts. Edited, with In¬ 
troduction, by ErnVARD VitES and Dr. 
Furnivalu Demy 8vo, cloth. 5s. net. 

Shakespeare's Motlnshed: a reprint 
of all the passages in Holinshed's 
’Chronicle' of which use was made In 
Shakespeare's Historical Plays, with 
Notes. Edited by \V. (j. Bos^VEL.L 
S^OXE. Royal 8vo. cloth, itu (kl, net. 

The Book of Eltzabethan Verse. 
Edited, with Notes, bv William 
Stanxey Braithwaits. With Frontis¬ 
piece and Vignette, bmall crown Svo, 
cloib,6<. net: vellum gilt, ns, bd.nvt. 

The Shakespeare Allusion Book* 
Reprints of references to Sh.'ikespc.it e 
and hisWorks before the close of tbc i7th 
century, collected by Dr. Ikglkby, Mis& 
L. TOULUXN Smith, Dr. Fuknivall, .ind 
J. J, MUNRO. Two VO Is., royal 8vo, cloth, 
ai^ net 

Harrison's Description of Eng¬ 
land* Pan iV. Uniform with Pans 
l.-lll. as issued by the New Shakspere 
Society. Edited by Dr. Fdrnivall. 
With additions bv Mrs. C. C. Stoi*e&. 
(aso co pies oaly.) 17^. 6 d, n et. 

A Study of Shakespeare* Ov A. C. 

SwiNDURNiL Crown 8vo, cloth, dx. 

The Age of Shakespeare* By A. C. 

SwiKBUK.SK. Crown bvo, buckram. 64, 
net. 

Shakespeare's Sweetheart: a 
Romance. DySakar h. :>TfCKLiNG. 
With 6 Coloured lllustratums by C, E. 
Pbck. Square 8vo, cloth. 

SHARP (WILLIAM).—Children 

of To-morrow. Crown fivo.cloJh, 3..6i<. 


27 


SMERARD (R. H.).—Rogues. 

Crown \.U»th. I 4 « 

SHE ^DA N’ 5 T^fC HARD 

BRINSLEY) Complete Works. 

Ci<iwH M’o, cloth, M. 0»/, 

SHtKWOOD (MAkOAREl).— 

DAPHNR: a Pastoral. With Colourcil 
Fronli'ip^ccc. Crown 8 vo, cloth, o.:, 

SHIEL (M. P.), Novels by. 

The Purple Cloud* Cr.^^v'^.cloth, 34, k/, 

Unto the Third Generation. Cv.hv 
cluib, uf. 


SIGNBOARDS: Their History, in¬ 
cluding Famous Taverns and Ucmarkablc 
Characters. By Jacob Larwood and J. 

C. HOTTEN, Witb95 Iliustralions, Crown 
ftvo. cloth, 

SIMS (QEOROE R.). Books by. 

Post 8vo. illustrated boards, xs, each; cloth 
limp. is. td, each, 

The Ring o' Bells. _ ^ 

TLnkletop's Crime* | Zepb« 

Dramas of Life* With tSo Iliu^Man'Uis. 
My Two Wives. I Tales of To-day* 
Memoirs of a Landlady* 

Scenes from the Show. 

The Ten Commandments. 

Cix>wn 8vo, picture cover, is. each; c)<»lh, 

IS. hif. each. 

The Dagooet Reciter and Reader. 
The Case of George Candlemar, 
Dagonet Ditties. 1 Life We Live. 
Young Mrs* Caudle* 

LI Ting of London. 

Crown 8vo, cloth. 31. 6d. each; post 8vo, 
picture boards, it. each ; cloth. 2s. od. each. 

Mary Jane's Memoirs. 

Mary Jane Married* 

Dagonet Abroad* 

Rogues and Vagabonds* 

Crown Bvo, cWh, 35. 6 d, caciL 
Joyce Pleaaantry. With a Frootu- 
piece by Huou ViumsoN. 

For Life—and After* 

Once upon a Chrletmas Time* 
With ^ Illustrations by CUAb. GRKKK, R.l. 
In London's Hear^ 

A Blind Marriage* 

Without the Limelight. 

The BmalLpart Lady* 

Biographs of Babylon. 

His Wife's Revenge* 

The Mystery of Mary Anne* 

Picture cloth, fiat b.'ick. is. each. 

Rogues and Vagabonds. 

In Londo n's Heart. 

Popt'LAR EbiTiOSS. medium 8 yo, 6d. each, 
Mary Jane's Memoirs* 

Mary Jane Married* 

Rogues a nd Vagabond s* 

How the Poor Live; and Horrible 
London* Crown Svo, leatherette, u, 
Dagonet Dramas* Crown 8vo, is. 


Ill ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W.C 


28 


CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


A 


SHELLEY’S Complete WORKS 

5 In Ver«eand Prose. Edited by R. 
• Herxb SHEWIKRD. $ Vols.. $5. 6d. ea. 

Poetical Wor^Si in Three Vols.: 

,Vol. I. Margaret Nicholson: Shelley’s 
Correspondence with Stockdale: Wandering 
Tew: Queen Mab ; Alastor ; Rcsalind and 
Helen ; Prometheus Unbound ; Adonais. 

Vol. II. Laon and Cythna: The Ccnci; 
Julian and Maddalo : Swellfoot the Tyrant; 
The Witch of Atlas ; Epipsychidion : Hellas. 

Vol. III. Posthumous Poems; The 
Masque of Anarchy ; and other Pieces. 

PrOBO Works, in Two Vols.: 

Vol. I. ZastfOiji; St. Irvyne: Dublin and 
Marlow Pamphlets : Refutation of Deism ; 
Lettersto Leigh Hunt; Minor Writings. 

Vol. II. E^avs; Letters from Abroad ; 
Translations and Fragments ; Biography. 


SISTER DORA. By M. Lonsoale. 

Demy 8vo, 4^«; cloth, 6 d, 

SLANG DICTIONARY (The): Hi:>- 

torical and Anecdotal* Cr. 8vo. cl.. 6 s. 64 , 


SMEDLEY(CONSTANCE: Mrs. 

Maxwell Armfleld)» Novels by. 
Crown 8vo, (>j. each. 

The June Princess. ] Service. 


SPETTIQUE (H. H.}. ~ The 

Heritage of Eve. Cr. 8 vo, cloth, 6 s. 

SPIELMANN (MRS. M. H.)_ 

UargeryRedford and her Friends* 

With numerous IUustraiions by GORDON* 
Browne. Large crown 8vo, cloth. net. 
The Rainbow Book: Sixteen 
Tales of Fun and Fancy. With 
^7 Illustraljoiis bv Ariiiuk Rackham, 
Hugh Thomson, Ber.vard Partridgh, 
Lewis Baumer, and other artists. Large 
crown Svo, cloth gilt, Ss. net. 


SPRIQQE (S. SQUIRE).—An 

Industrious Chevalier. Crown 8vo* 

3 <. 6 d. 


STAFFORD (JOHN), Novels by. 

Doris and I. Crown bvo, cloth, 3*. M, 
Carlton Priors. Crown Svo. cloth, 61. 


STANLEY (WINIFRED). —A 

Flajb of the Will. Cr. Svo. cloth. 6 s, 


ST A RRY H E A YENS Poetical 

Birthday Book* Pott 8vo, cloth, is. 64 , 


SOCIETY IN LONDON. Crown 

Svo, IS.; cloth. 14 . 6 <i. 

SOMERSET (Lord HENRY).- 

5ong5 of Adieu. 4to, Jap. vellum, 6 s. 


STEDMAN (E. C.).-Victorian 

Poets, Crown Svo, cloth, gs. 

STEPHENS (RICCARDO).—The 

Cruciform Mark. Cr. Svo. cl., 34. 64 . 

STEPHENS (R. NEILSON).— 

Philip Winwood. Cr. Svo. cl.. 3s. Oil. 


SPEIGHT (T. W.), Novels by. 

Post 8VO, iilu.stratcd boards. each. 

The Mysteries of Heron Dyke* 
By Devious Ways. 

Hoodwinked; ^ Sandycroft Mys-. 

tery* j The Golden Hoop. 

Back to Life. I Quittance In Full* 
The Doudwater Tragedy. 

Burgo’s Romance. 

A lAisband from the Sea. 


STERLING (S. H.U Stories by. 

Si^uarc Hvo. cloth, 6.<, each. 

Shakespeare’s Sweetheart. With 

^ Coloured Illustrations bv C. E. PiXK. 
A I«ady of King Arthur's Court. 
With lllustr.itions in Colour by Clara 
Elsene Peck, and other Decoralions. 


STERNDALE (R. ARMITAQEU 

^The Afghan Knife. Post Svo,doth. 
34. Of/.: illustrated boards, zs. 


Crown Svo, cloth ir. 64 . each. 

Her Ladyship. [ The Grey Monk; 
The Master of Trenance. 

The Secret of Wyvern Towers. 
Doom of Siva. | As It was Written 
The Web of Fate. 

Experiences of Mr. Verschoyle. 


Stepping Blindfold; Cr.Svo. cloth. 64, 
Wife or No Wlfe.Post 8vo. cloth, is. 64 . 

SPEIGHT (E. E.).—The Galleon 

of Torbay. Crown 8 vo, cloth, 64. 

SPENSER for Children. ByM.H. 

TOWRV. With Coloured Illustrations by 
W. /. Morgan. Crown 4I0, cloth, 34, 64. 


STERNE (LAURENCE).— 

A Sentimental Journey. With 8> 
Illustrations by T. H. RoRiNSON, and 
a Photogravure Port rail, Crown Svo, 
cloth gill, 34. <f 4 . 

STEVENSON (BURTON E.).— 

Affairs of 5tate« Crown Svo, cloth. 
Ss. 64 . 

STOCKTON" (FRA’nk R,).-The 

Young Master of Hyson Hall. With 
36 Illustrations. Crown Svo. clothi 
6./.; picture cloth, flat b.ack, is, 

STODDARD (C W.), Books by. 

Post Svo. cloth, gilt fop. 6 s. net each. 
South- Sea Idyls: SummerCrjlsing. 
The Island of Tranquil Delights* 









Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 


5.TEVENS0N (R. LOUIS), 

Works by. Cr. 8vc>. buckram, (>s. each. 
Travels with a Donkey* With a 
Front ispjecc by WALTtu Cmake. 

An Inland Voyage. With a KronUs- 
picc<' bv Waltkk Ck'N'K 

Familiar Studies of Men & Books. 
The Silverado Squatters* 

The Merry Men. 

Underwoods: I’oems. 

Memories and Portraits. 
Vlrginlbus Puerlsque. 

Ballads. I Prince Otto. 

Across the Plains. 

Weir of HermlGtOD, 

In the South Seas* 

Bssays of Travel. 

Tales and Fantasies. 

Essays In the Art of Writing. 

A liowden Sabbath Mora. With 
Coloured Frontispiece and other IllustrS' 
lions by A. S* Boyd. 

Songs of Travel* Cr.Svo, buckram, v. 
New Arabian Nights. Crown 8vo, 
buckram. ; post 8vo. illust. boards. 2^,: 
Popular EotTiow mediu m Svo, td. 
targe crown Svo, clolli. jt. o,/. nej each ; 
eaicniDent, lOf. net each : Lapge Paper 
Edition, pure rag paper, the ri,at«s 
noimtcrt. veiJum. sis, oct each. 

An Inland Voyage. Wiih la Illiis- 
Irationsin Colour, la in Dlack .and While 
and other Decoralions, hy Noel Rookk' 
Travel* with a Donkey In the 
Cevennea. With u iiiustr-viions in 
Colour. 12 in Black and While .md 
other De coralions. by Noel Rooke. 

■* orVoMea. With 

>2 lllustr.itions in Colour and numerous 
Black and White Drawincs by 
CENT SOWERDV. Large crown 8vo. cloth 
5 ^. net: Large Paper Bomox. parch¬ 
ment, IPS , 6g. net. _ ^ 

Post Svo, cloth backs, tr. net each ; leather 
^ 2^. net each. 

A Cnristmas Sortnon* 

Written at ValUma. 
There IS also -n Mimatcre Edition oT 

li'iKS 

The SuicideClnb; andThoBaJah's 

P***“o*Hl». (From New Akaiua.n 
Nights.) With 8 llluslrations by W i 

Svo. cloth, 3^ fed.’ 
Reader. Edited by 
, ^ 05 >bour.\e. Rost Svo, cloth 

The PoevHf »";• 3 ^- 

RX.a.: Favourite P.is. 
s>SM. i 6mo.cl..M.n et^lcather 3^. net. 

Editions. 

Ks ‘! ir.?.r 


29 


STEVEN 30 N (R. LOVlSy^ccnimu^d. 
Essays of Travel. 

The Silverado Squatters. 

Welp of Hermlston. 

Coikected Poems of R, L. S. 
R.L.Stevcnson: Abtudy. liyll.B Hah. 
Do.s UMh 2 Portraits. Cr 8vn,bijcki ..m 

Reconectlons of R* L* Stevenson 
In the Pad So. Hy Akriii Iohn* 
poNK. With Portrait Mid Facsiijuic 
l.cMrr. Crown Hvo, hiickram, /»? iit*t 


STONt (CHRISfORHtk).— 

_ Crown Xvi', 1 li>iu. 

STRAUS (RALPH), Novels by. 

Crown 8vo. i.lnih. Or, each. 

Tbo Man Apart. 

The Little Qod's Drum. 

5TRUTT (JdSEPri)“:^the 

^Dorts and Pastimes of the People 
of England. Wjih j^o Dlustraii.ms 
_chilh. yi. (hi. 

STUART (HT^LON QANT)— 

_yveepine Cross. Crnwn Hvo. cloth, Or. 

SULTAN CTHE)’AND"HIS”SUB- 

JECTS. liy kJoiAHi) DAVbV. Wiih 
_ Fo rtran. Dcrr<v hvf>, cic»th. 7 <. net 

SUNDOWNER, St^l^by^- 

The Tale of the Serpent* Crown 
8vr>. cloth. Hat back, at. '-rowji 

^^^^ED). - The 

_ _Fooll» h virgin,. F cp.rvo if :ci 

SWIFT’S (Dean) Choice'Works, 

in Prose and Verse. Cr. Kvo. cl., u. O.i. 
Jonathan SBlft: A Stiidv Bv I 
_ CHI'RTOS COLLINS. Cr. Rvo, ci.. rt. M, 

TA LQ E RNON 

ChARLBS) Work,«, 

In fi Vols., crown Svo. xtt, net the «et 

Mr. Swlnborno*s Collected Tra- 
gedles. In AVolR.,rf.8vn, :^or net thes^-t. 
SeleotlpDs from Mr. Swinburne's 
Works* With Preface bv T. Waits. 
Dfntos, and 2 PhotugraVure Plates 
reap, Svo, 6f. 

The Queen^MbTherr and Rosa¬ 
mond* Crown Svo. yt. 0 . 1 . net 
A talanta In Calydon* Crown Svo,Ax. 
Chastelard: A Tragedy. Ciown Kvo. 7X. 
Poems and Ballads* Fiusx Sehi^ 

Crown Svn, nx. 

Poems and Ballads* Secoko Series. 
Crown Svn <.«. 

Poems and Ballads* Third Series. 
Crown Svo, 74. 

Bongs before Sunrise* Crown Svo. 
ips.td. 

Bothvrell: ATragedv. CrowoSvo, i24.6ii 
Bongs of Two Nations. Crown 8vo ftj 
George Chapman flu Voi, 11 . or G. 

CllAPMA.v’K works.I Crown Svo, 34. Cai 
Essays and Studios* Crown Svo. i2j. 
Brechtheus : A Trnpedv. Crown Svo 6a. 
A Note on Charlotte Bronte* Crown 

Kvo. 6 j. 

A Study of Shakespeare* Cr.8vo, 84, 



30 


CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 


SWINBURNE (A, C.)--c. rUintud. 

Songa of the Springtides* Crowo 

6j. • 

Studies In Son^« Crown 8vo, 7$. 
Mary Stuart: A Tragedy. Crowndvo, Sr. 
Tristram of Lyonessei Crow'nSvo.or. 
A Century of Roundels. Cr. 8vo. 6r. 
A Midsummer Holiday* Cr. dvo. ys. 
Marino Fallero: A Tragedy. Crown 
8vo. tk?. 

A Study of Victor Hugo* Cr. 8vo« 6r 
Miscellanies* Crown 8vo, 12^* 
Locrlne : A Tragedy. Crown eivo. 6s, 

A Study of Ben Jonson* Cr. 8vo. ys. 
The Sisters: A Trageuy. Crown fir 
Astrophel* dtc* Crown 8vo. ys. 
Studies In Prose and Poetry. 
Crown 8vo, 9J. 

The Tale of Baten* Crown Svo, 71. 
Rosamundi Queen of the Lom¬ 
bards: A Tragcuv. Crown 8vo, ts. 

A Channel Passage* Crown $vo,7r. 
Love's Cross-Currents: A Year’s 
LcUcrs. Crown 6vo, os. act. 

William Blake. Crown 8vo. 6s. net. 
The Duke of Oandla. Crown 8to. ss. 
The Age of Shakespeare. Crown 
8VO. ts. net. 


SWINNERTON (FRANK A*)*— 

The Merry Heart* Cr. 8vi>. 


SYRETT (NETTA), NoveU oy, 

Anne Pago* Crowo 8vo, cloth* 3r. td. 


Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s, each. 

A Castle of Dreams. 
Olivia L. Carew. 


TAINE’S History of English 
Literature. Trans.oyHKKRY Van Laun. 
Four Vols.. dcinv Svo. cl. 3or.—PorULAK 
Edition, Two Vols., crown 8vo, cl, iss.. 
Fine Paper Edition, m Four Vols., witi 
33 Portraits. pottSvo, cloth,gilt top, 3^.net 
per voU: leather, glU edges 31. net per vol. 


THOMAS (BERTHA), Novels by* 

In a Cathedra] City. Cr.8vo,cl.3j*6d* 


Crown 8va, cloth. 6f. each. 

The House on the Scar* 
The Son of the House* 


THOREAU: His Life and Aims* 

By A, H. Page. With a Portrait Post I 
8vo, buckram^ 3^. 6d. ^ 


THORNBURY (WALTER).— 

Tales for the Marines* Post Svo, 
illustrated boards, 2s\ 

TIMES (JOHN), Works by. 1 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each. 

Clubs and Club Life In London* 

With 41 Illustrations. 

Bngllsh Eccentrics and Eccen¬ 
tricities. With 4b Illustrations. 


TREETON (ERNE5T A.).—The , 

Instigator* Crown Svo. cloth, 6s. 


TROLLOPE (ANTHONY), Novels 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each; post' 
8vo, IHustrated boards, each. r 

The Way We Live Now. ' 

Frau Frohmann* f Marlon Fay4 
The Land-Leaguers* ^ 

Post 8vn, 111 u*^t rated boards. 2s. each. t 


Kept In the Dark* 

The American Senator* 

The Golden Lion of Oran pare* 


TALES FOR THE HOMES. 

By TWE.STV-SiXWKLUKNOm'NAUTHORS. 
Edited by Rev. jf. MarchanT. Published 
tor the henehi of the Barkakdo Ms- 
MORIAL Fund. With 3 Portraits* Crown 
8vo. cloth. !\S. net 


TAYLOR (TOM). —Historical 

Dracnas* Crown 8vo, ss, each. 

* Jeanne Darc.' 

‘ Twixt Axe and Crown.' 

*The Fool's revenge/ 

‘ ArewriohTs Wife.' 

‘ Anne Boleyn,* 

‘Plot and passion.* 


THACKERAY : The Rose and 


Crown 8 VO, cloth, 3s. 6d. each, 

Mf; Scarborough’s Family* 
John Caldlgate* 


TROLLOPE (FRANCES E.),, 

Novels by* Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 
each: post Kvo, illustrated boards, ir.each. 

Like Ships upon the Sea* 
Mabel's Progress* | Anno Furness* 


TROLLOPE (T* A*)*—Diamond 

Cut DIarDOod* Post 8vo, Ulus. bds.. sj. 


TURENNE (RAYMOND).—The 


of the Maromoths* Crown 8vo, 
cl< 5 lb. 3 i* 


The Ring* With Coloured Frontispgce. 
44 Illustrations (12 in T\vo Tints) and 
Decorative End-papers by Gordon 
Browne. Dcniv 8vo, cloth, 3^, 6d. net. 

Thackeray (The Pocket). Arranged 
by A* H. HVATT. ibmo, cloth, gilt 
top, 2s. net ; leather, gilt top, 3s. net. 


THOMAS (ANNIE), Novels by. 

The Siren's Web* Cr. 8vo, cl, 3r. 6j, 
Comrades True* Crown 8vo, cloth, 6r, 


TWAIN^S (MARK) Books* 

UNIFORM LIBRARY EDITION. Crown 
8vo. cloth, 3c. 6d. each. 

Mark Twain's Llbraryof Humour. 

With ig7 illustrations bv E. W. Kbm&lk* . 
Roughing It: and The Innocents 
at Home* With 200 Illustrations by 
F. A. hRASBR. 

The American Claimant. \V](h 81 
Illustrations bv Hal HVRST and others. 
Padd'nhead WUson. With Portrait 
and Six Illustrations bv LODIS Loeb . 
*Tfae Ad vent urea of Tom Bstoyer* 
With 111 Illustrations. ^ 


( 



















CO 


SRINAGAR 




LIB R A« Y ^ 


Cfass No. 


Book No. 


Accession No. 



■e- 


9 




/ 



his book was 




This book was taken from th^ Cibrary^on the 
date last stamped* A fine of ^ anna will be 


1 



"I I 

\ 

I 

i\ 


r 

$ 

\ 


. AV 


« 



Ad— 

' .M Da,e Card No. 

I Date. ’^°- 


« 0^ 

17 De’^*^ 






i 'V 


i /'' t- 






%V 
%% 

^ Vv \^ 


\ \ W '" - \ 
^A \ v% '. '■ \ 

A i< \ o>^ 


\-t.\ % c 

\W ■ 

<L X 


