4 October 1906 Thursday, October 4, 1906 Miss Clara Clemens’s début début deébut accent added debut as a concert singer, at Norfolk, Connecticut, September 22d Connecticut, September 22d Conn. Sept. 22nd —Mr. Clemens’s talk—Difference between speeches and talks. It was my purpose, yesterday morning, to talk about Clara’s début début deébut accent added , and about that only, but of course I soon wandered from the track—however, however, but however, it is no matter; as I have said before, there is no law back of this autobiography which requires me to ever talk about a thing which I was intending to talk about, if in the meantime about, if in the meantime about, if in the meantime when I chance to get interested in something else. I will return to that début début deébut accent added now. When the fact transpired that Clara was to sing in Norfolk on the 22d 22d 22nd , the Associated Press and the newspapers took it up, and although some of them printed Clara’s portrait, and in that way made her prominent above me, all of them touched her name name name ‘name’ underscored rather lightly in the display-heads display-heads display-display heads display heads but but but and ‘STET’ written underneath ‘but’ but put “Mark Twain’s daughter” in very large letters. This was vinegar for Clara, but saccharin for me, for I had been pretending for two years that for her there could be no glory comparable to the glory of being my daughter, and that therefore she ought to suppress herself and sail altogether under my name. Naturally, she wouldn’t listen to this most reasonable suggestion, but perversely wanted to succeed upon her own merit or not at all. In Florence, two years ago, she thought she had suppressed me in the bills, but at the last moment the management management Mmanagement ‘M’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ treacherously intruded me, and she sang (mainly) (mainly) (mainly) as Mark Twain’s daughter. Our skirmishings have continued ever since, and they have have have had a real joy for me and a vexation for her which was not wholly fictitious. When she was leaving for Norfolk on the 21st I begged her to let me go up there, the next day, and lead her out on the platform, but she wouldn’t allow it. She evidently believed I was in earnest. earnest. earnest. , and she wouldn’t allow it. She said I would get all the welcome and she none. But when our old Katy came back from depositing her on board her train, she said that Clara’s courage had weakened, and she had concluded that she would prefer to face her first audience under her father’s protection. This would be unwise, and of course must not happen, but I thought I would keep up the game, game, game, game anyway. When she arrived in Norfolk, Norfolk, Norfolk, Norfolk Mrs. R. W. R. W. R. W. Gilder, who was mothering her, promptly decided that it wouldn’t do for me to lead her out. Her manager manager Mmanager ‘M’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ also said it mustn’t even be thought of. Other friends said the same. Very well, who was to convey this decision to me? Neither Clara nor the others were willing to bell this cat. When I arrived in Norfolk at noon on the 22d 22d 22nd , Clara timidly suggested that if I led her out I would have to answer the call for a speech, and she thought it ought to be very brief. I pretended to be greatly gratified with even this small chance to show off, and eagerly said I would confine myself to saying merely these words: “I should be most glad to respond, but Mr. Luckstone, who was to accompany me on the trombone, has unfortunately caught cold and is not able to keep his engagement.” Clara was much relieved, and said that if I would restrict myself to that she would be content. But when she reported this to the manager manager Mmanager ‘M’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ there was more trouble. He said: “It will not do. They will not let him stop with that, and if he gets to talking he will be so charmed with himself that he may never get through at all; all; all,; all, and meantime you will be standing there gradually wilting away to nothing. This is our show, not his, and if we don’t keep him off the platform, somehow or other, he will take it away from us.” Clara asked him to convey this decision to me, but he said he was too young to approach my white head with such a mission. Mr. Luckstone declined on the same terms, and so did the others. But Rodman Gilder, aged twenty-three, spoke up and said he would tell me. They all admired his pluck, and were properly thankful. They left for the hall hall Hhall ‘H’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ at seven in the evening in a quite happy and grateful frame of mind, and when Rodman and I followed them, an hour and a half later, he said: “Mr. Clemens, they don’t want you to lead Miss Clara out.” I said, “Why I never intended to”—and we dropped the subject there and took up another one. When we arrived, arrived, arrived, arrived Rodman reported, but those people were so set in their belief that I was going to raid their show that they didn’t credit Rodman’s statement, but placed guards over the greenroom and the stage entrances to bar me out. They gave us seats in the third row, and I awaited Clara’s appearance without much apprehension, for I judged that in case her vocalization should not be up to standard, her youth and her beauty would carry her to success anyway, for she is beautiful, I concede it myself, who shouldn’t. She was heartily received, and when she had reached the middle of her first number Mr. Luckstone, at the piano, turned his head over his shoulder and beamed upon her, and Miss Gordon, who sat breathless and trembling with anxiety trembling with anxiety quaking trembling with anxiety at my right, whispered, “That means approbation!— approbation!— approbation!— she’s perfectly safe now.” And it was true. She gathered strength and confidence from that time forth, and carried the house house house triumphantly with her to the end. From the beginning of the evening to the finish she was frozen with stage-fright stage-fright stage fright , but she had concealed it so well that, with all my stage experience, I had not suspected it, and I am sure that no one in the house had detected it. That was good grit, and characteristic of her native pluck. At the finish she was recalled a couple of times; then Miss Gordon and I made a plunge for the stage—both of us to congratulate her, and I to show off and get my share of the glory. When we reached the stage she was coming on in answer to a third call, and I kissed her, with calculated effusion and ostentation, her, with . . . ostentation, her, with . . . ostentation,—to show off— but the audience thought it was only a stage kiss, a pretended kiss, and they shouted: “Do Do Do ‘Do’ underscored it—do it! do it! do it! ‘do’ underscored ” I led her off the stage to the greenroom, and then, in answer to a call for myself, she led me me me ‘me’ underscored on, thus reversing my original program program programme . I didn’t make a speech, but only talked. I talked fifteen or twenty minutes; and that is the disaster that could have happened if my vicious original program program programme had been carried out—a procedure which I had never at any time proposed to myself, myself, myself, myself of course. In our trip around the world Clara had heard me make a great many speeches, and so when she said of this one “it is “it is “That is “it is “That “it is the happiest talk you have ever made,” I said she was a competent judge and I could endorse her verdict. My My My . . . My talk was reported in the newspapers, and by consequence I now have an opportunity to say something which I have long long long wanted to say. It is this: It is proper enough to publish speeches speeches speeches ‘speeches’ underscored —real speeches, artistic speeches—for by reason of their nicely calculated form and graceful phrasing they read well in print and convey the speaker’s whole meaning; but a talk talk talk ‘talk’ underscored is a very different thing, and ought never to be printed. It never reads well; print kills it. An easy-going talk is as effective with an audience as the best of speeches, but its effectiveness proceeds from an art which is all its own, and is quite different from the speaker’s art. A fine speech may be badly delivered, delivered, delivered, yet read perfectly in print, for the delivery is not there to mar it; but it is the delivery delivery delivery ‘delivery’ underscored that makes a talk effective, not the phrasing. The speaker says all all all ‘all’ underscored the words of his speech, and and and they are all necessary; nothing is left unsaid to be supplied by the hearer’s intelligence; intelligence; intelligence; and all the words go into print; but in a talk many a word is left out and many a sentence left unfinished; because, when unfinished; because, when unfinished.; because, When the house breaks into applause applause applause, or laughter laughter laughter, in the middle of a talker’s sentence, he recognizes that it has caught his idea, idea, idea, and so so so he doesn’t finish the sentence; the stenographer doesn’t finish it for him, and it goes into print in that broken and incomprehensible form. The talker leaves out many a word and supplies its place with something much better—a look, an emphasis, an inflection, an inflection, an inflection, a pause, a fictitious hesitation for a word, the ghost of a gesture—in a word, the best and most effective parts of a talk are acted acted acted ‘acted’ underscored , not spoken. The acting cannot be conveyed in print, therefore the juice of the talk has disappeared and nothing but the dry husk remains. Clara thought that that was a very felicitous talk of mine, and I was willing to admit it. But in print it was altogether the flattest piece of rubbish I have seen in a year. seen in a year. ever seen in a year. It was an extinguished lightning-bug.