31 August 1906 Friday, Friday, Friday, Friday, Dictated August 31, 1906 Mr. Clemens appoints two two 2 pupils and tries his scheme for Spontaneous Oratory Spontaneous Oratory spontaneous oratory at the Dublin club house club house club-house —Tells of his second lecture and the repetition of the Horace Greeley story—Tells the same thing later at Chickering Hall—The series of seven seven 7 photographs of Mr. Clemens—Letter from his long-vanished long-vanished long vanished sweetheart, Laura Wright—Reminiscences of her; of Youngblood, the pilot; and of Davis, the mate—Letter offering tour in vaudeville. Around about here, in the New Hampshire New Hampshire not in New Hampshire woods and hills, are scattered a couple of dozen summer resorters, who own their houses and who come here every summer, some of them some of them some of them from as far away as Chicago and St. Louis. They have a modest and pretty club house for dances and other diversions, and two or three times a month they meet there and are entertained with with by with music, lectures, and so on, furnished by the home talent. The home talent consists of distinguished artists, college professors, historians, and so on—and I am a part of it myself. My turn having arrived now, I mean to exploit my system of “Spontaneous Oratory” “Spontaneous Oratory” spontaneous oratory, s“Spontaneous oOratory,” comma deleted by Lyon; capitals and quotation marks added by SLC to-morrow afternoon, and see how it will go. Yesterday I appointed a couple of pupils—Messrs. Brush and Smith—explained pupils—Messrs. Brush and Smith—explained pupils—Messrs. Brush and Smith—explained pupils,—Messrs. Brush and Smith—explained the game to them, and required them to be on hand to-morrow with three good anecdotes apiece. I shall ask the audience for a subject, and we three will debate it in accordance with the principles of my system. I believe the performance will be elevating and instructive. I know it will if my pupils bring good anecdotes, and if they shall always remember to introduce each anecdote each anecdote the anecdotes the each anecdotes with one and the same set formula monotonously—without changing a word. with one and the same formula monotonously—without changing a word. with the set formula, without changing a word. with the one and the same set formula, monotonously —without changing a word. ‘set’ deleted and then restored; the whole phrase underscored I will furnish the formula; repetition of it will do the rest. I will furnish the formula; repetition of it will do the rest. not in I will furnish the formula; repetition of it will do the rest. For repetition For repetition For Repetition For Repetition is a mighty power in the domain of humor. If frequently used, nearly any precisely worded and unchanging formula precisely worded and unchanging formula precisely worded and unchanging formula precisely worded and unchanging formula ‘precisely worded and unchanging formula’ underscored will eventually eventually eventually compel laughter if it be gravely and earnestly and earnestly and earnestly repeated, at intervals, five or six times. I undertook to prove the truth of this, forty years ago, in San Francisco, on the occasion of my second attempt at lecturing. My first lecture had succeeded to my satisfaction. Then I prepared another one, but was afraid of it because the first fifteen minutes of it was not humorous. I felt the necessity of preceding it with something which would break up the house with a laugh and get me on pleasant and friendly terms with it at the start, instead of allowing it leisure leisure leisure to congeal into a critical mood, since that could be disastrous. With this idea in mind, I prepared a scheme of so daring a nature that I wonder now that I ever had the courage to carry it through. San Francisco had been persecuted for five or six years with a silly and pointless and unkillable unkillable un-killable anecdote which everybody had long ago grown weary of—weary unto death. It was as much as a man’s life was worth to tell that mouldy mouldy moldy anecdote to a citizen. I resolved to begin my lecture with it, it, that anecdote, it, and keep on repeating it until the mere repetition should conquer the house and make it laugh. That anecdote is in one of my books. There were fifteen hundred people present, and as I had been a reporter on one of the papers on one of the papers on one of the papers for a good while I knew several hundred of them. They loved me, they couldn’t help it; me, they couldn’t help it; me;, they couldn’t help it; they admired me; and I knew it would grieve them, disappoint them, and make them sick at heart to hear me fetch out that odious anecdote with the air of a person who thought it new and good. I began with a description of my first day in the overland coach; then I said, “At a little ’dobie ’dobie ’dobie dobie station out on the plains, next day, a man got in and after chatting along pleasantly along pleasantly along pleasantly along for a while he said ‘I can tell you a most laughable thing indeed, if you would like to listen to it. Horace Greeley went over this road once. When he was leaving Carson City he told the driver, Hank Monk, that he had an engagement to lecture at Placerville and was very anxious to go through quick. Hank Monk cracked his whip and started off at an awful pace. The coach bounced up and down in such a terrific way that it jolted jolted jounced jolted the buttons all off of Horace’s coat and finally shot his head clean through the roof of the stage, and then he yelled at Hank Monk and begged him to go easier—said he warn’t warn’t warn’t warsn’t in as much of a hurry as he was a while ago. But Hank Monk said “Keep “Keep ‘Keep your seat, Horace, I’ll get you there on time!” time!” time!’ —and you bet he did, too, what was left of him!’ ” him!’ ” him!” I told it in a level voice, in a colorless and monotonous way, without emphasizing any word in it, and succeeded in making it dreary and stupid to the limit. Then I paused and looked very much pleased with myself, and as if I expected a burst of laughter. Of course there was no laughter, nor anything resembling it. There was a dead silence. As far as the eye could reach that sea of faces was a sorrow to look upon; some bore an insulted look; some exhibited resentment, my resentment, my resentment,. Mmy [‘M’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’] friends and acquaintances looked ashamed, and the house, as a body, looked as if it had taken an emetic. I tried to look embarrassed, and did it very well. For a while I said nothing, but stood fumbling with my hands in a sort of mute appeal to the audience for compassion. Many did pity me—I could see it. But I could also see that the rest were thirsting for blood. thirsting for blood. thirsting for my blood. thirsting for my blood. deeply incensed. Lyon deleted ‘my’; later deletion/insertion by SLC I presently began again, and stammered awkwardly along with some more details of the overland trip. Then I began to work up toward my anecdote again with the air of a person who thinks he did not tell it well the first time, and who feels that the house will like it the next time, if told with a better art. The house perceived that I was working up toward the anecdote again, and its indignation was very apparent. Then I said, “Just after we left Julesburg, on the Platte, I was sitting with the driver and he said ‘I said ‘I said——” [¶] Then I went on as drearily and as monotonously as before, and carefully using exactly the same form and words which I had previously used, [¶] “The driver said— ‘I can tell you a most laughable thing indeed if you would like to listen to it. Horace Greeley went over this road once. When he was leaving Carson City he told the driver, Hank Monk, that he had an engagement to lecture at Placerville and was very anxious to go through quick. Hank Monk cracked his whip and started off at an awful pace. The coach bounced up and down in such a terrific way that it jolted jolted jounced jolted the buttons all off of Horace’s coat and finally shot his head clean through the roof of the stage, and then he yelled at Hank Monk and begged him to go easier—said he warn’t warn’t warn’t warsn’t in as much of a hurry as he was a while ago. But Hank Monk said “Keep “Keep ‘Keep your seat, Horace, I’ll get you there on time!” time!” time!’ —and you bet he did, too, what was left of him!’ ” him!’ ” him!” I stopped again, and looked gratified and expectant, but there wasn’t a sound. The house was as still as the tomb. I looked embarrassed again. I fumbled again. I tried to seem ready to cry, and once more, after a considerable silence, I took up the overland trip again, and once more I stumbled and hesitated along—then then then presently began again to work up toward the anecdote. The house exhibited distinct impatience, but I worked along up, trying all the while to look like a person who was sure that there was some mysterious reason why these people didn’t see how funny the anecdote was, and that they must see it if I could ever manage to tell it right, therefore I must make another effort. I said, “A day or two after that we picked up a Denver man at the cross-roads and he chatted along very pleasantly for a while. Then he said ‘I can tell you a most laughable thing indeed, if you would like to listen to it. Horace Greeley went over this road once. When he was leaving Carson City he told the driver, Hank Monk, that he had an engagement to lecture at Placerville and was very anxious to go through quick. Hank Monk cracked his whip and started off at an awful pace. The coach bounced up and down in such a terrific way that it jolted jolted jounced jolted the buttons all off of Horace’s coat and finally shot his head clean through the roof of the stage, and then he yelled at Hank Monk and begged him to go easier—said he warn’t warn’t warn’t warsn’t in as much of a hurry as he was a while ago. But Hank Monk said “Keep “Keep ‘Keep your seat, Horace, I’ll get you there on time!” time!” time!’ —and you bet he did, too, what was left of him!’ ” him!’ ” him.!” period mended to an exclamation point All of a sudden the front ranks recognized the sell, and broke into a laugh. It spread back, and back, and back, to the furthest verge of the place; then swept forward again, and then back again, and at the end of a minute the laughter was as universal and as thunderously noisy as a tempest. It was a heavenly sound to me, for I was nearly exhausted with weakness and apprehension, and was was was becoming almost convinced that I should have to stand there and keep on telling that anecdote all night, before I could make those people understand that I was working working doing working a delicate piece of piece of piece of satire. I am sure I should have stood my ground and gone on favoring them with that tale until I broke them down, down, down, for I had for I had under under for I had the unconquerable conviction that the monotonous repetition of it would infallibly fetch them some time or other. A good many years afterward there was to be an Authors’ Reading at Chickering Hall, in New York, and I thought I would try that anecdote again, and see if the repetition would be effective with an audience wholly unacquainted with it, and who would be obliged to find the fun solely in the repetition, if they found it at all, since there would be not a shred of anything in the tale itself that could stir anybody’s sense of humor but an idiot’s. I sat by James Russell Lowell on the platform, and he asked me what I was going to read. I said I was going to tell a brief and wholly pointless anecdote in a dreary and monotonous voice, and that therein would consist my whole performance. He said, “That is a strange idea. What do you expect to accomplish by it?” I said, “Only a laugh. I want the audience to laugh.” He said “Of course you do—that is your trade. They will require it of you. But do you think they are going to laugh at a silly and pointless anecdote drearily and monotonously told?” “Yes,” I said, “they’ll laugh.” Lowell said “I think you are dangerous company. I am going to move to the other end of this platform and get out of the way of the bricks.” When my turn came I got up and exactly repeated—and most gravely and drearily—that San Francisco performance of so many years before. It was as deadly an ordeal as ever I have been through in the course of my checkered life. I never got a response of any kind until I had told that juiceless juiceless juiceless anecdote in the same unvarying unvarying unvarying words five times five times ‘five times’ underscored ;then the house saw the point and annihilated the heart-breaking silence and annihilated the heart-breaking silence and let go and annihilated the heart-breaking silence with a most welcome crash. It revived me, and I needed it, for if I had had to tell it four more times I should have died—but I would have done it, if I had had to get somebody to hold me up. The house kept up that crash for a minute or two, and it was a soothing and blessed soothing and blessed delightful soothing and blessed thing to hear. Mr. Lowell shook me cordially by the hand, and said said he said , “Mark, it was a triumph of art! art! art.! period mended to an exclamation point art. It was a triumph of grit, too. I would rather lead a forlorn hope and take my chances of a soldier’s bloody death than try to duplicate that performance.” He said that during the first four repetitions, with that mute and solemn and wondering house before him, he thought he was going to perish with anxiety for me. me. me,. and commiseration. He said he had never been so sorry for a human being before, and that he was cold, all down his spine, until the fifth repetition broke up the house and brought the blessed relief. The following post-card has been issued this morning to our summer resorters, and I think that if we fail in other ways, in our debate, the day will be saved anyhow by six or eight repetitions of that formula “How felicitously what I have just been saying is illustrated in the case of the man who—” At the Club, on Saturday, September the 1st 1st first , Mr. Mark Twain will reveal and explain the true secret of after-dinner speaking, and in a single lesson will teach novices, by a method of his own, how to speak successfully and acceptably acceptably acceptabley acceptable upon any topic whatsoever, without embarrassment, without previous preparation, and even without knowledge of the subject. After his explanation there will be a debate between himself and his pupils, and his pupils, and and his pupils, and and his pupils Messrs. George Brush and Joseph Smith, in illustration of his method. The exhibition will begin at 4 p.m. The pictures which Mr. Paine made on the portico here several weeks ago, have been developed, and are good. For the sake of the moral lesson which they teach, I wish to insert a set of them here for future for future for the future generations to study, with the result, I hope, that they will reform, if they need it—and I expect they will. I am sending half a dozen of these sets to friends of mine who need reforming, and I have introduced the pictures to them to them to them with this formula: This series of photographs registers with scientific precision, stage by stage, the progress of a moral purpose through the mind of the human race’s Oldest Friend. Handwritten on photograph: No. 1 Shall I learn to be good? . . . . . . . . . . I will sit here and think it over. Truly Yours Mark Twain Sept. ’06. Handwritten on photograph: No. 2 There do seem to be so many diffi . . . . Handwritten on photograph: 3 And yet if I should really try . . . . . Handwritten on photograph: No. 4. . . . . and just put my whole heart in it . . . . . . . Handwritten on photograph: No. 5 . . . . But then I couldn’t break the Sab . . . . . Handwritten on photograph: No. 6. . . . . and there’s so many other privileges, that . . . . perhaps . . . . . Handwritten on photograph: 7 Oh, never mind, I reckon I’m good enough just as I am. At last we have heard again from my long-vanished long-vanished long vanished little fourteen-year-old sweetheart of nearly fifty years ago. It had begun to look very much as if we had lost her again. She was drifting about among old friends in Missouri, and we couldn’t get upon her track. We supposed that she had returned to her home in California, where she teaches school, and we sent the check there. It traveled around during two months and finally found her, three or four days ago, in Columbia, Missouri. She has written a charming letter, and it is full of character. Because of the character exhibited, I find in her, once more once more once more, once more at sixty-three, the little girl of fourteen of so long ago. When she went back up the river, on board the John J. Roe, in that ancient day which I have already spoken of in a previous chapter, the boat struck a snag in the night and was apparently booked booked bound booked to find the bottom of the Mississippi in a few minutes. She was rushed to the shore, and there was great excitement and much noise. Everybody was commanded to vacate the vessel vessel boat vessel instantly. This was done,—at least for the moment no one seemed to be missing. Then Youngblood, one of the pilots, discovered that his little niece was not among the rescued. He and old Davis, the mate, rushed aboard the sinking boat boat vessel boat and hammered on Laura’s door, which they found locked, and shouted to her to come out—that there was not a moment to lose. She replied quite calmly that there was something the matter with her hoop-skirt, and she couldn’t come yet. They said, “Never mind the hoop-skirt. Come without it. There is no time to waste upon trifles.” waste upon trifles.” lose.” waste upon trifles.” But she answered, just as calmly, that she wasn’t going to come until the skirt the skirt it the skirt it her skirt was repaired and she was in it. She kept her word, and came ashore, at her leisure, completely dressed. I was thinking of this when I was reading her letter this morning, and the thought carried me so far back into the hoary past that for the moment I was living it over again, and was again a heedless and giddy lad, with all the vast intervening stretch of years abolished—and along with it my present condition, and my white head. And so, when I presently came upon the following passage in her letter it hit me with an astonishing surprise, and seemed to be referring to somebody else: else: else.: period mended to a colon else. But I must not weary you nor take up your valuable time with my chatter. I really forget that I am writing to one of the world’s most famous and sought-after sought-after sought-after sought after men, which shows you that I am still roaming in the Forest of Arden. And so I am a hero to Laura Wright! Wright! Wright.! period mended to an exclamation point It is wholly unthinkable. One can be a hero to other folk, and in a sort of vague way understand it, or at least believe it, but that a person can really be a hero to a near and familiar friend, is a thing which no hero has ever yet been able to realize, I am sure. She has been visiting the Youngbloods. It revives in me some ancient and tragic memories. Youngblood was as fine a man as I have known. In that day he was young, and had a young wife and two small children—a most happy and contented family. He was a good pilot, and he fully appreciated the the his the responsibilities of that great position. Once when Once when Once When a passenger boat upon which he was standing a pilot’s watch was burned on the Mississippi, he landed the boat and stood to his post at the wheel until everybody was ashore and the entire after part of the boat, including the after part of the pilot-house, was a mass of flame; then he climbed out over the breast-board breast-board breast-board and escaped with his life, though badly scorched and blistered by the fire. A year or two later, in New Orleans, he went out one night to do an errand for the family and was never heard of again. It was supposed that he was murdered, and that was doubtless the case, but the matter remains a mystery yet. That old mate, Davis, was a very interesting man. He was past sixty, and his bush bush brush marked to close up of hair and whiskers would have been white if he had allowed them to have their own way, but he didn’t. He dyed them, and as he only dyed them four times a year he he it he was generally a curious spectacle. When the process was successful, his hair and whiskers were sometimes a bright and attractive green; at other times they were a deep and agreeable agreeable engaging agreeable purple; at still other times they would grow out and expose half an inch of white hair. Then the effect was striking, particularly as regards his whiskers, because in certain lights the belt of white hair next to his face would become nearly invisible; then his bush bush brush of whiskers did not seem to be connected with his face at all, but quite separated from it and independent of it. Being a chief mate, he was a prodigious and competent swearer, a thing which the office requires. the office requires. the office requires. indeed is required of him. But he had an auxiliary vocabulary which no other mate on the river possessed, and it made him able to persuade indolent indolent ignorant indolent roustabouts more effectively than did the swearing of any other mate in the business, in the business, on the river, in the business, on the river, in the business because while it was not profane, it was of so mysterious and formidable and terrifying a nature that it sounded five or six times as profane as any language to be found on the fo’castle anywhere in the river service. Davis had no education beyond reading and something which so nearly resembled writing that it was reasonably reasonably reasonably well calculated to deceive. He read, and he read a great deal, and diligently, but his whole library consisted of a single book. It was Lyell’s “Geology,” “Geology,” Geology, and he had stuck to it until all its grim and rugged grim and rugged great grim and rugged scientific terminology was familiar in his mouth, though he hadn’t the least idea of what the words meant, and didn’t care what they meant. All he wanted out of out of with out of those great words was the energy they stirred up in his roustabouts. the energy they stirred up in his roustabouts. to hump up the energy they stirred up in his roustabouts. with. In times of extreme emergency emergency hurry and emergency he would let fly fly fly with a volcanic irruption irruption eirruption of the old regular orthodox profanity mixed up and seasoned all through with imposing geological terms, then formally charge terms, then formally charge terms, and wind up his expostulations and call then formally charge his roustabouts with being with being with being Old Old oOld Silurian Invertebrates out Invertebrates out blatherskites out Invertebrates out of the Incandescent Anisodactylous Post-Pliocene Period, and damn the Incandescent Anisodactylous Post-Pliocene Period, and damn the Igneous red sandstone period, and then damn the Incandescent Anisodactylous Post-Pliocene Period, and damn the whole gang gang gang as pre-Adamite post-Pliocene invertebrates, and consign them in a body to perdition. perdition. hell. perdition. People are always wounding my dignity. Every Every Not many do it, but Every now and then some ignorant person afflicts me in that way. I was once a lecturer, but I have reformed long ago. I have discarded all such degradations degradations degredations and have tried to make the world understand that I am now a stately stately lofty stately person who has retired from all small things and sits upon a summit apart—a great and shining literary light who deals substantially with nothing on a lower plane than the sun and the constellations. And so when a letter such as came in this morning’s mail reaches me, it drags me down from my summit and humiliates me. Read Read Now rRead this irreverent letter and reflect upon reflect upon insert reflect upon it. Think of of of the idea of a person proposing a tour in vaudeville to a man of my proportions proportions imposing proportions ! He wants to arrange a tour, he says, in which he could give me three consecutive weeks and one week of rest. He has no shame. He says he could give me as many weeks as I might desire, and that he would simply want a “sixteen to twenty minute monologue or lecture as you might choose to call it, and twice a day.” Why Why Damn him, wWhy doesn’t he propose a clog-dance clog-dance clog dance and done and done and be done with it? He He I detest a man that makes me swear in public in this way. He thinks I would enjoy such an engagement—thinks it will be a new field for me and show me a new set of faces; also he thinks the best part of the whole thing would be the “renumeration.” It is a good enough word, but it could not be more offensive to me if he had spelled it right. He thinks he can secure me a very “tidy sum” “tidy sum” “tidy sum” tidy sum per week. But read read take read the letter. letter. letter. and put it in. I am wounded to the heart, and I cannot go on with it. If this man shall chance to shall chance to should shall chance to hear of our Spontaneous Oratory Spontaneous Oratory sSpontaneous oOratory experiment, he will probably affront me again. The Boyle Agency International Vaudeville and Dramatic 31 west 31st street New York August 24, 1906 1906 1906 190__ ‘190__’ printed 1906. Samuel L. Clemmens, Esq., (Mark Twain) 21 Fifth Avenue, New York My Dear Mr. Clemens:— I should like to suggest to you a tour in vaudeville. I shall be able to arrange a tour in which we could give you say three consecutive weeks and one week of rest. I could give you as many weeks as you might desire beginning September 24 or the first week of October. I make this explanation, as I feared you could consider vaudeville too strenuous. We would simply want a sixteen to twenty minute monologue or lecture as you might choose to call it, and twice a day. Some of the weeks would include Sunday and some of them would mean only six days. I am very sure that you would enjoy such an engagement. It will be a new field for you, and would show you a new set of faces. The best part of the whole thing would be the renumeration. I am very sure that I can secure for you a very tidy sum per week. I name, of course, Hammerstein’s and the Percy G. Williams’ houses in this city and Brooklyn, and the highest class vaudeville houses in other cities East of Chicago. Kindly give this matter your earnest thought and let me know what you think you would like for this kind of an engagement per week. Trusting that you are enjoying the best of health and that I may have a favorable reply from you, I am Very truly yours, B. Butler Boyle