15 March 1906 March 15, 1906 Monday, March 5, 1906. title March 15, 1906 Monday, March 5, 1906. Monday, March 5, 1906 (Dictated March 15th) Mr. Clemens talks to the West Side Young Men’s Christian Association in the Majestic Theatre Theatre Theater Theatre —Miss Lyon meets one of the Christian young men at the door—Patrick’s funeral—Luncheon next day at the Hartford Club—Mr. Clemens meets eleven eleven 11 of his old friends—They tell many stories: Rev. Dr. McKnight and the Jersey funeral—Mr. Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s story on board the Kanawha, about Richard Croker’s father—The Mary Ann story story story! story —Decoration Day and the fiery Major and Mr. Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s interrupted prayer. prayer. prayer. ‖ flush left Sunday, March 4, ’06 written above the clipping, which is pasted to a leaf inserted after the words ‘Charley Clark,’ (10.20) prayer. ‖ centered (Clipping from New York Times, March 4th, 1906). typed on leaves inserted before the first leaf of the dictation POLICE HUSTLE CROWD AWAITING MARK TWAIN Bungle at the Majestic Theatre Angers Y. M. C. A. Men. WOULDN’T OPEN THE DOORS Mr. Clemens Gives Some Advice About the Treatment of Corporations and Talks About Gentlemen. Members of the West Side Branch of the Young Men’s Christian Association found that entering the Majestic Theatre yesterday afternoon to hear an address by Mark Twain had a close resemblance to a football match. No one was injured, but for a few minutes the police were hustling the crowd backward and forward by sheer force, a mounted man was sent to push his way through the thickest of the press and the jam was perilous. The doors of the theatre should have been opened at 3 o’clock, and about three hundred persons were there at that time. It was an orderly crowd of young young yaung young men with a sprinkling of elderly ones, but Capt. Daly of the West Forty-seventh Street Station would not allow them to be admitted until he had summoned the reserves. It took twenty minutes for these to arrive and every moment the crush grew greater. Still there was no disorder and the police as they formed into line had to face nothing more dangerous than a little good-humored chaff. The crowd was ranged in a rough column facing the main doors of the lobby. The Young Men’s Christian Association authorities came out several times and asked the Captain to allow the doors to be opened. “If you do it, I’ll take away my men and there’ll be a lot of people hurt or killed,” he replied. “I know how to handle crowds.” Then he proceeded to handle the crowds. He tried to swing the long solid line up against the southwestern side of Columbus Circle and force them in by the side entrance of the lobby, instead of the one they faced. First he sent a mounted man right through the column. The patrolmen followed and in a moment the orderly gathering was hustled and thrust in all directions. Capt. Daly’s next manoeuvre was to open the side door. The crowd surged up, but he had them pushed back, and closed the door again. The crowd was utterly bewildered. Then the Young Men’s Christian Association authorities opened one-half one-half one-half the one-half of the door on their own responsibility. Through this narrow passage the crowd squeezed. The plate glass in the half that was closed was shattered to atoms, and the men surged forward. A few coats were torn, but in spite of the way in which they had been handled everybody kept his temper. If there had been any disorderly element present nothing could have avoided serious accidents. In the end all but 500 gained admission. Hold Police Responsible. At the opening of the meeting, the Rev. Dr. Charles P. Fagnani, the Chairman, said: “The management desires to disclaim all responsibility for what has happened. [Cheers.] The matter was taken out of their hands by the police. [Hisses.] We wanted to open the doors earlier, but our lords and masters, the police, took the matter into their own hands and settled it in their own way. [Hisses.] You have been accustomed long enough to being brutally treated by the police, and I do not see why you should mind it. [A voice: “You’re right.”] Some day you will take matters into your own hands and will decide that the police shall be the servants of the citizens.” At the end of the meeting, Charles F. Powlison, Secretary of the West Side Branch, stated he had been asked to submit a resolution condemning the action of the police, but it has been decided it was better not to do so. Mark Twain was introduced as a man “well worth being clubbed to hear.” He was greeted with a storm of applause that lasted over a minute. “I thank you for this signal recognition of merit,” he said. “I have been listening to what has been said about citizenship. You complain of the police. You created the police. You are responsible for the police. They must reflect you, their masters. Consider that before you blame them. “Citizenship is of the first importance in a land where a body of citizens can change the whole atmosphere of politics, as has been done in Philadelphia. There is less graft there than there used to be. I was going to move to Philadelphia, but it is no place for enterprise now. “Dr. Russell spoke of organization. I was an organization once myself for twelve hours, and accomplished things I could never have done otherwise. When they say ‘Step lively,’ remember it is not an insult from a conductor to you personally, but from the President of the road to you, an embodiment of American citizenship. When the insult is flung at your old mother and father, it shows the meanness of the omnipotent President, who could stop it if he would. Mark Twain Got the Stateroom. “I was an organization once. I was traveling from Chicago with my publisher and stenographer—I always travel with a bodyguard—and engaged a stateroom on a certain train. For above all its other conveniences the stateroom gives the privilege of smoking. When we arrived at the station the conductor told us he was sorry the car with our stateroom was left off. I said: ‘You are under contract to furnish a stateroom on this train. I am in no hurry. I can stay here a week at the road’s expense. It’ll have to pay my expenses and a little over.’ “Then the conductor called a grandee, and, after some argument, he went and bundled some meek people out of the stateroom, told them something not strictly true, and gave it me. About 11 o’clock the conductor looked in on me, and was very kind and winning. He told me he knew my father-in-law—it was much more respectable to know my father-in-law than me in those days. Then he developed his game. He was very sorry the car was only going to Harrisburg. They had telegraphed to Harrisburg, Pittsburg, San Francisco, and couldn’t get another car. He threw himself on my mercy. But to him I only replied: “ ‘Then you had better buy the car.’ “I had forgotten all about this, when some time after Mr. Thomson of the Pennsylvania heard I was going to Chicago again, and wired: “ ‘I am sending my private car. Clemens cannot ride on an ordinary car. He costs too much.’ ” Yesterday, in the afternoon, I talked to the West Side Young Men’s Christian Association in the Majestic Theatre. The audience was to have been restricted to the membership, or at least to the membership’s sex, but I had asked for a couple of stage boxes and had invited friends of mine of both sexes to occupy them. There was trouble out at the doors, and I became afraid that these friends would not get in. Miss Lyon volunteered to go out and see if she could find them and rescue them from the crowd. She was a pretty small person for such a service, but maybe her lack of dimensions was in her favor, rather than against it. She plowed her way through the incoming masculine wave and arrived outside, where she captured the friends, and also had an adventure. Just as the police were closing the doors of the theatre and announcing to the crowd that the place was full and no more could be admitted, a flushed and excited man crowded his way to the door and got as much as his nose in, but there the officer closed the door and the man was outside. He and Miss Lyon were for the moment the centre centre center of attention—she because of her solitariness in that sea of masculinity, and he because he had been defeated before folks, a thing which we all enjoy, even when we are West Side Young Christians and ought to let on that we don’t. The man looked down at Miss Lyon—anybody can do that without standing on a chair—and he began pathetically—I say began pathetically; the pathos of his manner and his words was confined to his beginning. He began on Miss Lyon, then shifted to the crowd for a finish. He said “I have been a member of this West Side Young Men’s Christian Association in good standing for seven years, and have always done the best I could, yet never once got any reward.” He paused half an instant, shot a bitter glance at the closed door, and added with deep feeling “It’s just my God damned luck.” I think it damaged my speech for Miss Lyon. The speech was well enough—certainly better than the report of it in the papers—but in spite of her compliments, I knew there was nothing in it as good as what she had heard outside; and by the delight which she exhibited in that outsider’s eloquence I knew that she knew it. I will insert here a passage from the newspaper report, because it refers to Patrick. Definition of a Gentleman. Mark Twain went on to speak of the man who left $10,000 to disseminate his definition of a gentleman. He denied that he had ever defined one, but said if he did he would include the mercifulness, fidelity, and justice the Scripture read at the meeting spoke of. He produced a letter from William Dean Howells, and said: “He writes he is just 69, but I have known him longer than that. ‘I was born to be afraid of dying, not of getting old,’ he says. Well, I’m the other way. It’s terrible getting old. You gradually lose your faculties and fascinations your faculties and fascinations things, your faculties and fascinations and become troublesome. People try to make you think you are not. But I know I’m troublesome. “Then he says no part of life is so enjoyable as the eighth decade. That’s true. I’ve just turned it it into it it , and I enjoy it very much. ‘If old men were not so ridiculous’—why didn’t he speak for himself? ‘But,’ he goes on, ‘they are ridiculous, and they are ugly.’ I never saw a letter with so many errors in it. Ugly! I was never ugly in my life! Forty years ago I was not so good-looking. A looking glass then lasted me three months. Now I can wear it out in two days. “ ‘You’ve been up in Hartford burying poor old Patrick. I suppose he was old, too,’ says Mr. Howells. No, he was not old. Patrick came to us thirty-six years ago—a brisk, brisk, brisk, brisk lithe young Irishman. He was as beautiful in his graces as he was in his spirit, and he was as honest a man as ever lived. For twenty-five years he was our coachman, and if I were going to describe a gentleman in detail I would describe Patrick. “At my own request I was his pall-bearer with our old gardener. He drove me and my bride so long ago. As the little children came along he drove them, too. He was all the world to them, and for all in my house he had the same feelings of honor, honesty, and affection. “He was 60 years old, ten years younger than I. Howells suggests he was old. He was not so old so old so old old . He had the same gracious and winning ways to the end. Patrick was a gentleman, and to him I would apply the lines: So may I be courteous to men, faithful to friends, True to my God, a fragrance in in to in the path I trod.” trod.” trod. trod.” At the funeral I saw Patrick’s family. I had seen no member of it for a good many years. The children were men and women. When I had seen them last they were little creatures. So far as I could remember I had not seen them since as little chaps they joined with ours, and with the children of the neighbors, in celebrating Christmas Eve around a Christmas tree in our house, on which occasion Patrick came down the chimney (apparently) disguised as St. St. Saint Nicholas, and performed the part to the admiration of the little and the big alike. John, our old gardener, was a fellow pall-bearer with me. The rest were Irish coachmen and laborers—old friends of Patrick. The Cathedral was half filled with people. I spent the night at Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s house, that night, and at noon next day at the Hartford Club I met, at a luncheon, eleven of my oldest friends—Charley Clark Charley Clark Charlieey Clarke Charley Clarke , editor of the Courant; Judge Hamersley Hamersley Hammersley , of the Supreme Court; Colonel Colonel Col. Cheney, Sam Dunham, Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , Rev. Dr. Parker, Charles E. Perkins, Archie Welch Welch Welsh . A deal of pretty jolly reminiscing was done, interspersed with mournings over beloved members of the old comradeship whose names have long ago been carved upon their gravestones gravestones grave-stones . The Rev. Dr. McKnight was one of these. He was a most delightful man. And in his day he was almost a rival of Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell in the matter of having adventures. Once when he was serving professionally in New York, a new widower came and begged him to come over to a Jersey town and conduct the funeral of his wife. McKnight consented, but said he should be very uneasy if there should be any delay, because he must be back in New York at a certain hour to officiate at a funeral in his own church. He went over to that Jersey town and when the family and friends were all gathered together in the parlor he rose behind the coffin, put up his hands in the solemn silence and said, “Let said, ¶ “Let said no ¶ “Let said ¶ “Let us pray.” There was a twitch at his coat-tail and he bent down to get the message. The widower whispered and said, “Not said, ¶ “Not said no ¶ “Not said ¶ “Not yet, not yet—wait a little.” McKnight waited a while. Then remembering that time was passing passing passing pressing and he must not miss his train and the other funeral, he rose again, put up his hands and said, “Let said, ¶ “Let said no ¶ “Let said ¶ “Let us pray.” There ¶ There no ¶ There ¶ There was another twitch at his coat-tail. He bent down and got the same message. “Not yet, not yet—wait a little.” He waited; became uneasier than ever; got up the third time, put up his hands and got another twitch. This time when he bent down the man explained. He whispered: “Wait a little. She’s not all here. Stomach’s at the apothecary’s.” Several things were told on Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell illustrative of his wide catholicity of feeling and conduct, and I was able to furnish something in this line myself. Three or four years ago, when Sir Thomas Lipton came over here to race for the America cup, I was invited to go with Mr. Rogers and half a dozen half a dozen half-a-dozen other worldlings in Mr. Rogers’s yacht, the Kanawha, Kanawha, Kanawha, the swiftest steam yacht in the world, Kanawha, to see the race. Mr. Rogers is fond of Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell and wanted to invite him to go also, but was afraid to do it because he thought Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell would be uncomfortable among those worldlings. I said I didn’t think that would be the case. I said Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell was chaplain in a fighting brigade all through the Civil War Civil War civil war , and was necessarily familiar with about all the different kinds of worldlings that could be started; so Mr. Rogers told me—though with many misgivings—to invite him, and that he would do his best to see that the worldlings should modify their worldliness and pay proper respect and deference to Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s cloth. When Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell and I arrived at the pier at eight in the morning, the launch was waiting for us. All the others were on board. The yacht was anchored out there ready to sail. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell and I went aboard and ascended to the little drawing-room on the upper deck. The door stood open, and as we approached approached approached approached we heard hilarious laughter and talk proceeding from that place, place, place, place, and I I I I recognized that the worldlings were having a worldly good time. But as Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell appeared in the the that the the door all that hilarity ceased as suddenly as if it had been shut off with an electric button, and the gay faces of the worldlings at once put on a most proper and impressive solemnity. The last word we had heard from these people was the name of Richard Croker, the celebrated Tammany leader, all-round all-round all-round all-round blatherskite and chief pillager of the municipal till. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell shook hands all around and broke out with, “I with, ¶ “I with ¶ “I with ¶ “I heard you mention Richard Croker. I knew his father very well indeed. He was head teamster in our brigade in the Civil War Civil War civil war —the Sickles brigade—a fine man; as fine a man as a person would want to know. He was always splashed over with mud, of course, but that didn’t matter. The man inside the muddy clothes was a whole man; and he was educated; he was highly educated. He was a man who had read a great deal. And he was a Greek scholar; not a mere surface scholar, but a real one; used to read aloud from his Greek Testament, Testament, Testament, Testament, and when he hadn’t it handy he could recite from it it his Greek Testament it it from memory, and he did it well, and with spirit. Presently I was delighted to see that every now and then he would come over of a Sunday morning and sit under the trees in our camp with our boys and listen to my ministrations. I couldn’t refrain from introducing myself to him—that is I couldn’t refrain from speaking to him about this, and I said, “ ‘Mr. said, ¶ “ ‘Mr. said no ¶ “Mr. said ¶ “Mr. Croker, Croker, Croker I want to tell you what a pleasure it is to see you come and sit with my boys and listen to me. For I know what it must cost you to do this, and I want to express my admiration for a man who can put aside his religious prejudices and manifest the breadth and tolerance that you have manifested.’ ” manifested.’ ” manifested. manifested.” He flushed, and said with eloquent emphasis— emphasis— emphasis— emphasis— “ ‘Mr. Twichell, ¶ “ ‘Mr. Twichell, ¶ “Mr. Twitchell ¶ “Mr. Twichell do you take me for a God damned papist?’ ” papist?’ ” papist?” Mr. Rogers said to me, aside, “This relieves me from my burden of uneasiness.” Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , with his big heart, his wide sympathies, and his limitless benignities and charities and generosities, is the kind of person that people of all ages and both sexes fly to for consolation and help in time of trouble. He He Twitchell He He is always being levied upon by this kind of persons. Years ago—many years ago—a soft-headed young donkey who had been reared under Mr. Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s spiritual ministrations sought a private interview—a very private interview—with him, him, him, him, and said, “Mr. said, ¶ “Mr. said ¶ “Mr. said ¶ “Mr. Twichell Twichell, Twitchell Twichell , I wish you would give me some advice. It is a very important matter with me. It lies near my heart, and I want to proceed wisely. Now it is like this: I have been down to the Bermudas on the first vacation I have ever had in my life, and there I met a most charming young lady, native of that place, and I fell in love with her, Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell . I fell in love with her, oh so deeply! Well, I can’t describe it, Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell . I can’t describe it. I have never had such feelings before, before, before, before, and they just consume me; they burn me up. When I got back here I found I couldn’t think of anybody but that girl. I wanted to write to her, but I was afraid. I was afraid. It seemed too bold. I ought to have taken advice, advice, advice, advice, perhaps—but really I was not myself. I had had had ‘had’ underscored had to write—I couldn’t help it. So I wrote to her. I wrote to her as guardedly as my feelings would allow—but I had the sense all the time that I was too bold—I was too bold—she wouldn’t like it. I I I wasn’t—I I —well, sometimes I would almost think maybe she would answer; but then there would come a colder wave and I would say—‘No, I shall never hear from her—she will be offended.’ But at last, Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , a letter has has has ‘has’ underscored has come. I don’t know how to contain myself. I want to write again, but I may spoil it—I may spoil it—and I want your advice. Tell me if I had better venture. Now here she has written—here is her letter, Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell . She says this: she says—she says—‘You say in your letter you wish it could be your privilege to see me half your time. How would you like it to see me all all all ‘all’ underscored all the time?’ What do you think of that, Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell ? How does that strike you? Do you think she is not offended? Do you think that that that that that indicates a sort of of of initial, of a shadowy leaning toward me? Do you think it, Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell ? Could you say that?” “Well,” Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell said, “I would not like to be too sanguine. I would not like to commit myself too far. I would not like to put put throw put put hopes into your mind which could fail of fruition, but, on the whole—on the whole—daring is a good thing in these cases. Sometimes daring—a bold front—will accomplish things that timidity would fail to accomplish. I think I would write her—guardedly of course—but write her.” “Oh Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , oh you don’t know how happy you do make me. I’ll write her right away. But I’ll be guarded. I’ll be careful—careful.” Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell read the rest of the letter—saw that this girl was just simply throwing herself at this young fellow’s head and was going to capture him by fair means or foul, but capture him. But he sent the young fellow away to write the guarded letter. In due time he came with the girl’s second letter and said, “Mr. said, ¶ “Mr. said no ¶ “Mr said ¶ “Mr. Twichell, Twichell Twitchell Twichell will you read that? Now read that. How does that strike you? Is she kind of leaning my way? I wish you could say so, Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell . You see there, there, there, there, what she says. She says—‘You offer to send me a present of a ring—’ I did it, Mr. Twichell! Twichell! Twitchell,! comma mended to an exclamation point Twichell! I declare it was a bold thing—but—but—I couldn’t help it—I I I did that—I I did that intrepid thing—and that is what she says: ‘You offer to send me a ring. But my father is going to take a little vacation excursion in the New England States States states and he is going to let me go with him. If you should send the ring here it might get lost. We shall be in Hartford a day or two; two; two,; comma mended to a semicolon two; won’t it be safer to wait till then and you put it on my finger yourself?’ “What do you think of that, that, that Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell ? How does it it it that it strike you? Is she leaning? Is she leaning?” “Well,” Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell said, “I don’t know about that. I must not be intemperate. I must not say things too strongly, for I might be making a mistake. But I think—I think—on the whole I think she is leaning—I do—I think she is leaning—” “Oh Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , it does my heart so much good to hear you say that! that! that.! period mended to an exclamation point that! Mr. Twichell, Twichell, Twitchell Twichell if there was anything I could do to show my gratitude for those words—well, you see the condition condition comndition ‘m’ mended to ‘n’ condition I am in—and to have you say that—” that—” that—” I am not myself! that—” Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell said “Now wait a minute—now let’s not make any mistake here. Don’t you know that this is a most serious position? It can have the most serious results upon two lives. You know there is such a thing as a mere passing fancy that sets a person’s soul on fire for the moment. That person thinks it is love, and that it is permanent love—that it is real love. Then he finds out, by and by, that it was but a momentary insane passion—and then perhaps he has committed himself for life, and he wishes he was out of that predicament. Now let us make sure of this thing. I believe that if you try, and conduct yourself wisely and cautiously—I don’t feel sure, but I believe that if you conduct yourself wisely and cautiously you can beguile that girl into marrying you.” “Oh Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , I can’t express—” “Well never mind expressing anything. What I am coming at is this: let us make sure of our position. If this is real real real ‘real’ underscored real love, go ahead! ahead! ahead.! period mended to an exclamation point ahead! If it is nothing but a passing fancy, drop it right here, for both your sakes. Now tell me, is it real love? If it is real love how do you arrive at that conclusion? Have you some way of proving to your entire satisfaction that this is is is ‘is’ underscored is real, genuine, lasting, permanent love?” love?” love?” love?” “Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , I can tell you this. You can just judge for yourself. From the time that I was a baby in the cradle, up, Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , I have had to sleep close to my mother, with a door open between, because I have always been subject to the most horrible nightmares nightmares night-mares night-mares , and when they break out my mother has to come running from her bed and appease me and comfort me and pacify me. Now then, Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , from the cradle up, whenever I got hit with those nightmare convulsions I have always sung out Mamma, Mamma, Mamma. Now I sing out Mary Ann, Mary Ann, Mary Ann.” Ann.” Ann.” Ann. So they were married. They moved to the West and we know nothing more about the romance. Fifteen or twenty years ago, Decoration Day happened to be more like the Fourth of July for temperature than like the 30th of May. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell was orator of the day. He pelted his great crowd of old Civil War Civil War civil war soldiers for an hour in the biggest church in Hartford, while they mourned and sweltered. Then they marched forth and joined the procession of other wilted old soldiers that were oozing from other churches, wilted old soldiers that . . . churches, old soldiers that wilted old soldiers that . . . churches, and tramped through clouds of dust to the cemetery and began to distribute the flags and the flowers—a tiny flag and a small basket of flowers to each military grave. This industry went on and on and on, everybody breathing dust—for there was nothing else to breathe; everybody streaming with perspiration; everybody tired and wishing it was over. At last there was but one basket of flowers left, only one grave still undecorated. A fiery little Major Major major Major whose patience was all gone, gone, gone, gone, was shouting, shouting, shouting, shouting, “Corporal ¶ “Corporal ¶] “Corporal ¶ “Corporal Henry Jones, Company C, Fourteenth Connecticut Infantry—” No response. Nobody seemed to know where that corporal was buried. The Major raised his note a degree or two higher. “Corporal ¶ “Corporal ¶ “Corporal ¶ “Corporal Henry Jones Jones Jones Jones ‘Jones’ underscored , Company C, Fourteenth Connecticut Infantry! Infantry! Infantry Infantry! —doesn’t anybody know where that man is buried?” buried?” buried?” buried?” No response. Once Once “Once Once , twice, three times, times, times,” times, he shrieked again, again, again, again, with his temper ever rising higher and higher,— higher,— higher,— higher,— “Corporal ¶ “Corporal ¶ “Corporal ¶ “Corporal Henry JONES! JONES! Jones, JONES,! ‘Jones’ underscored three times to capitalize; comma mended to an exclamation point Company C! C! C, C.! comma mended to an exclamation point Fourteenth Connecticut Infantry! Infantry! Infantry Infantry! —doesn’t ANYBODY ANYBODY anybody ANYBODY ‘anybody’ underscored three times to capitalize know where that man is buried?” No response. Then Then And Then Then he slammed the basket of flowers on the ground and said to Twichell, “Proceed Twichell, ¶ “Proceed Twitchell no ¶ “Proceed Twichell ¶ “Proceed with the finish.” finish.” benediction.” finish.” finish.” The crowd massed themselves together around Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell with uncovered heads, the silence and solemnity interrupted only by subdued sneezings, for these people were buried in the dim cloud of dust. After a pause Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell began an impressive prayer, making it brief to meet the exigencies of the occasion. In the middle of it he made a pause. The drummer thought he was through, through, through, through, and let fly a rub-a-dub-dub—and the little Major stormed out “Stop that drum!” “Stop that drum!” “Stop that drum.!” ‘Stop’ underscored; period mended to an exclamation point “Stop that drum!” Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell tried again. He got almost to the last word safely, when somebody trod on a dog and the dog let out a howl of anguish that could be heard beyond the frontier. The Major said, “God said, ¶ “God said no ¶ “God said ¶ “God damn that dog!” dog!” dog!” dog!” —and Twichell said, “Amen.” Twichell said, ¶ “Amen.” Twitchell said no ¶ “Amen.” Twichell said ¶ “Amen.” That is, he said it as a finish to his own prayer, but it fell so exactly at the right moment that it seemed to include the Major’s, too, and so he felt greatly honored, and thanked him. That is, . . . felt greatly honored, and thanked him. That was told at a lunch in Hartford last spring. That luncheon party consisted almost entirely of clergymen, and of old church members in good standing, yet there was as pleasant and as liberal a flow of entertaining profanity as I have ever encountered, even in the choicest worldly society. That is, . . . was felt greatly touched and honored, and thanked him. inserted passage written on a separate piece of paper clipped to TS2 That . . . liberal flow . . . society. TS4 matches TS2 as typed, except for the omission of ‘a’ before ‘flow’