5 April 1906 Thursday, April 5, 1906 Thursday, April 5, 1906 Thursday, April 5, 1906. Dictated Thursday, April 5, 1906. Dictated Thursday, April 5, 1906. Miss Mary Lawton the rising sun, Ellen Terry the setting sun—Ellen Terry’s farewell banquet, on fiftieth fiftieth 50th anniversary—Mr. Clemens’s cablegram—Mr. Clemens has fine new idea for a play; Mr. Hammond Trumbull squelches it—Orion Clemens is defeated as Secretary of State—At Mr. Camp’s suggestion Mr. Clemens speculates unfortunately—Mr. Camp offers to buy Tennessee Land Land land for two hundred thousand dollars two hundred thousand dollars $200,000 . Orion refuses—Mr. Clemens just discovers that he still owns a thousand a thousand 1000 acres of the Tennessee Land Land land —Orion comes East, gets position on Hartford Evening Post Evening Post Evening Post —After various business ventures he returns to Keokuk and tries raising chickens. Am I standing upon the world’s back and looking east toward the rising sun and west toward the setting sun? That is a handsome figure! figure! figure. figure.! period mended to an exclamation point figure! I wonder if it has been used before. It probably has. Most things that are said have been said before. In fact all things that are said have been said before. Moreover they have been said many millions of times. This is a sad thing for the human race that sits up nine nights in the week to admire its own originality. The race has always been able to think well of itself, and it doesn’t like people who throw bricks at its naïve naïve naiïve dieresis added naiïve dieresis added naïve self-appreciation. It is sensitive upon this point. The other day I furnished a sentiment in response to a man’s request—to wit: “The noblest work of God?” Man. “Who found it out?” Man. I thought it was very good, and smart, but the other person didn’t. But I must get back to the back of the world and look east and west again at those suns. One of them is Miss Mary Lawton, Miss Mary Lawton, Miss Mary Lawton, Miss Mary Lawton, marked by Paine ‘omit?’, deleted by SLC not in an American young young young young not in lady who has been training herself for the stage; and at last we hope and believe we see an opening for her. We strongly believe at last we hope and believe we see an opening for her. We strongly believe at last . . . strongly believe whose friends at last . . . strongly believe believe whose friends believe that hers will be a great name some day. Fay Davis, a famous and popular actress who is playing the chief rôle in a serious and impressive drama called—never mind the name, I have forgotten it—wishes to retire from the piece as soon as a competent successor can be found; and at Daniel Frohman’s suggestion I cabled London two or three days ago and asked Charles Frohman if he would let Miss Lawton try that part. Fay Davis, a famous and popular actress who is playing the chief rôle in a serious and impressive drama called—never mind the name, I have forgotten it—wishes to retire from the piece as soon as a competent successor can be found; and at Daniel Frohman’s suggestion I cabled London two or three days ago and asked Charles Frohman if he would let Miss Lawton try that part. (Fay Davis) . . . roôle . . . (Miss Lawton) . . . that part. circumflex added by Hobby, parentheses by SLC Fay Davis . . . rôle. . . Miss Lawton . . . that part.circumflex added by Hobby; ‘Fay Davis’ and ‘Miss Lawton’ bracketed for omission by Paine; passage deleted by SLC, who noted marginally: ‘Omit all between the brackets.’ not in That is the sun which is apparently about to rise; the sun which is about to set is That is the sun which is apparently about to rise; the sun which is about to set is That is the sun which is about to rise, if we are not mistaken in our astronomy. [¶] The sun which is about to set is That is the sun which is apparently about to rise,; if we are not mistaken in our astronomy. [¶] Tthe sun which is about to set is comma mended to a semicolon That is the sun which is apparently about to rise: [◇◇◇] sun which is about to set is damaged Ellen Terry, who has been a queen of the English stage for fifty years, and will retire from it on the 28th of this month, which will be the fiftieth anniversary. She will retire in due form at a great banquet in London, and cablegrams meet for the occasion will flow in upon the banqueteers from old friends of hers in America and other formerly distant regions of the earth—there are no distant regions now. The American cablegrams are being collected by a committee committee Committee in New York, and by request I have furnished mine. To do these things by cable, at twenty-five cents a word, is the modern way and the only way. They could go by post at no expense, but it wouldn’t be good form. [Privately I will remark that they do go by mail—dated to suit the requirements.] [Privately I will remark that they do go by mail—dated to suit the requirements.] [Privately I will remark that they do go by mail—dated to suit the requirements.] (Privately I will remark that [In fact they do go by mail—dated to suit the requirements.) (In fact they do go by mail—dated to suit the requirements.) Age has not withered, nor custom staled, the admiration and affection I have felt for you so many many years. I lay them at your honored feet with the strength and freshness of their youth upon them undiminished. [¶] Age . . . undiminished. centered:Cablegram to Ellen Terry, London. [¶] “Age . . . undiminished. Mark Twain.” ‘Cablegram to Ellen Terry, London.’ underscored centered: Cablegram to Ellen Terry, London. [¶] Age . . . undiminished. Mark Twain. [¶] Age . . . undiminished. She is a lovely character, as was also Sir Henry Irving, who lately departed this life. I first knew them thirty-four years ago in London, and thenceforth held them in high esteem and affection. She is . . . affection. She is . . . affection. She is . . . affection. not in When I ushered in that large figure, a while ago, about the world’s back and the rising and sinking suns, and exposed a timid doubt as to the freshness of that great figure, that timidity was the result of an experience of mine a quarter of a century ago. One day a splendid inspiration burst in my head and scattered my brains all over the farm—we were spending the summer at Quarry Farm that summer. That explosion fertilized the farm so that it yielded double crops for seven years. That wonderful inspiration of mine was what seemed to me to be the most novel and striking basic idea for a play that had ever been imagined. I was going to write that play at once, and astonish the world with it; it; it, it,; comma mended to a semicolon it; and I did, indeed, begin upon the work immediately. Then it occurred to me that as I was not well acquainted with the history of the drama it might be well for me to make sure that this idea of mine was really new before I went further. So I wrote Hammond Trumbull, of Hartford, and asked him if the idea had ever been used on the stage. Hammond Trumbull was the learned man of America at that time, and had been so regarded by both hemispheres for a good many years. I knew that he would know all about it. I waited a week and then his answer came. It covered several great pages of foolscap written in Trumbull’s small and beautiful hand, and the pages consisted merely of a list of titles of plays in which that new idea of mine had been used, in about sixty-seven countries. I do not remember how many thousand plays were mentioned in the list. I only remember that he hadn’t written down all the titles, but had only furnished enough for a sample. And I also remember that the earliest play in the invoice invoice lot lot invoice invoice was a Chinese one and was upwards of twenty-five hundred years old. That figure of mine—standing on the back of the world and watching the rising and the declining suns suns sun suns suns —is really stately, is really fine, but I am losing confidence in it. Hammond Trumbull is dead. But if he were with us now he could probably furnish me with a few reams of samples. Am I . . . of samples. Am I . . . of samples. Am I . . . of samples. boxed, with marginal comment: ‘Strike out these paragraphs. Mark.’ not in note that within the entries through 20.4, the readings of NAR 12pf are not represented as canceled Orion Clemens—Resumed. Orion Clemens—Resumed. Orion Clemens resumed. ‘Orion Clemens resumed.’ underscored Orion Clemens—resumed. Dictated April 5, 1906. Orion Clemens—resumed. Orion Clemens—resumed. [¶] [Dictated April 5, 1906.] There were several candidates for all the offices in the gift of the new State of Nevada save two—United States Senator, Senator Senator (Governor Nye) Senator, (Governor Nye) Senator, and Secretary of State. State. State (Orion Clemens). State. (Orion Clemens). State. 1864–65 1864–65 not in 1864–5. inserted in the margin 1864–5.) inset Nye was certain to get a Senatorship, Senatorship, Senatorship, Senatorship, and Orion was so sure to get the Secretaryship that no one but him was named for that office. But he was hit with one of his spasms of virtue on the very day that the Republican party was to make its nominations in the Convention, and Convention, and Convention. Orion Convention. Orion, and Convention, and refused to go near the Convention. He was urged, but all persuasions failed. He said his presence there would be an unfair and improper influence, influence, influence, influence, faintly typed comma influence and that if he was to be nominated the compliment must come to him as a free and unspotted gift. This attitude would have settled his case for him without further effort, but he had another attack attack spasm spasm attack attack of virtue on the same day, that that and that and that that made it absolutely sure. It had been his habit for a great many years to change his religion with his shirt, and his ideas about temperance at the same time. He would be a teetotaler for a while and the champion of the cause; then he would change to the other side for a time. On nomination day he suddenly changed from a friendly attitude toward whisky whisky whiskey —which was the popular attitude—to uncompromising teetotalism, and went absolutely dry. His friends besought and implored, but all in vain. He could not be persuaded to cross the threshold of a saloon. The paper next morning contained the list of chosen nominees. His name was not in it. He had not received a vote. His rich income ceased when the State government came into power. when the State government came into power. instantly. when the State government came into power. when the State government came into power. He was without an occupation. Something had to be done. He put up his sign as attorney at law, but he got no clients. It was strange. It was difficult to account for. I cannot account for it—but if I were going to guess at a solution I should guess that by the make of him he would examine both sides of a case so diligently and so conscientiously that when he got through with his argument with his argument with his argument with his argument neither he nor a jury would know which side he was on. I think that his client would find out his make in laying his case before him, him, him, him, and would take warning and withdraw it in time to save himself from probable disaster. I had taken up my residence in San Francisco about a year before the time I have just been speaking of. One day I got a tip from Mr. Camp, a bold man who was always making big fortunes in ingenious speculations and losing them again in the course of six months by other speculative ingenuities. Camp told me to buy some shares in the “Hale and Norcross.” “Hale and Norcross.” Hale and Norcross. I bought fifty shares at three hundred dollars a share. I bought on a margin, and put up 20 20 twenty per cent. It exhausted my funds. I wrote Orion and offered him half, and asked him to send his share of the money. I waited and waited. He wrote and said he was going to attend to it. The stock went along up pretty briskly. It went higher and higher. It reached a thousand dollars a share. It climbed to two thousand, then to three thousand; then to twice that figure. thousand; then to twice that figure. thousand.; then to twice that figure. period mended to a semicolon thousand; then to twice that figure. The money did not come, but I was not disturbed. By and by that stock took a turn and began to gallop down. Then I wrote urgently. Orion answered that he had sent the money long ago—said he had sent it to the Occidental Hotel. I inquired for it. They said it was not there. To cut a long story short, that stock went on down until it fell below the price I had paid for it. Then it began to began to began to began to canceled, then cancel mark wiped out and letters retraced began eat up the margin, and when at last I got out I was very badly crippled. When it was too late, I found out what had become of Orion’s money. Any other human being would have sent a check, but he sent gold. The hotel clerk put it in the safe and went on vacation, went on vacation, never thought of it again, never thought of it again, went on vacation, went on vacation, and there it had had not in had had reposed all this time enjoying its fatal work, no doubt. Another man might have thought to tell me that the money was not in a letter, but was in an express package, but it never occurred to Orion to do that. Later, Mr. Camp gave me another chance. He agreed to buy our Tennessee land for two hundred thousand dollars, pay a part of the amount in cash and give long notes for the rest. His scheme was to import foreigners from grape-growing and wine-making districts in Europe, settle them on the land, and turn it into a wine-growing country. He knew what Mr. Longworth thought of those Tennessee grapes, and was satisfied. I sent the contracts and things to Orion for his signature, he being one of the three heirs. But they arrived at a bad time—in a doubly bad time, in fact. The temperance virtue was temporarily upon him in strong force, and he wrote and said that he would not be a party to debauching the country with wine. Also he said how could he know whether Mr. Camp was going to deal fairly and honestly with those poor people from Europe or not? not? not? not? —and so, so, so, so, without waiting to find out, he quashed the whole trade, and there it fell, never to be brought to life again. The land, land, land, land, from being suddenly worth two hundred thousand dollars, dollars, dollars, dollars, became as suddenly worth what it was before—nothing, and taxes to pay. I had paid the taxes and the other expenses for some years, but I dropped the Tennessee Land Land land there, there, there, there, and have never taken any interest in it since, pecuniarily or otherwise, until yesterday. I had supposed, until yesterday, that Orion had frittered away the last acre, and indeed that was his own own not in own own impression. But a gentleman arrived yesterday from Tennessee and brought brought he brought brought a map showing that by a correction of the ancient surveys we still own a thousand acres, in a coal district, out of the hundred thousand acres which my father left us when he died in 1847. The gentleman brought a proposition; also he brought a reputable and well-to-do citizen of New York. The proposition was that the Tennesseean gentleman should sell that land; that the New York gentleman should pay all the expenses and fight all the lawsuits, in case any should turn up, and that of such profit as might eventuate the Tennesseean gentleman should take a third, the New Yorker New Yorker New Yorker New-Yorker a third, and Sam Moffett and his sister (Mrs. Charles L. Webster), and his sister (Mrs. Charles L. Webster), and his sister (Mrs. Chas. L. Webster), and his sister (Mrs. Chas. L. Webster), and his sister and I—who are the surviving the surviving the surviving surviving heirs—the remaining third. This time I hope we shall get rid of the Tennessee Land Land land for good and all and never hear of it again. again. again. It was created under a misapprehension; my father loaded himself up with it under a misapprehension; he unloaded it on to us under a misapprehension, and I should like to get rid of the accumulated misapprehensions and what is left of the land as soon as possible. again. It was created under a misapprehension; he unloaded it on to us under a misapprehension, and I should like to get rid of the accumulated misapprehensions and what is left of the land as soon as possible. again. 1867 1867 (1867) typed in the margin (1867.) inset I came East in January 1867. Orion remained remained remaied remained in Carson City perhaps a year longer. Then he sold his twelve-thousand-dollar twelve-thousand-dollar twelve thousand dollar twelve-thousand-dollar house and its furniture for thirty-five hundred in greenbacks at about 60 60 thirty thirty sixty sixty per cent cent cent. discount. He and his wife took first-class passage in the steamer for New York. In New York they stopped at an expensive hotel; explored the city in an expensive way; then fled to Keokuk, and arrived there about as nearly penniless as they were when they had migrated thence in July ’61. He and his wife took first-class passage in the steamer for New York. In New York they stopped at an expensive hotel; . . . July ’61. He and his wife took first-class passage in the steamer for New York. In New York they stopped at an expensive hotel—; . . . July ’61. He and his wife took first-class passage in the steamer forhome—Keokuk. New York. In New York they stopped at an expensive hotel; . . . July ’61. ‘He and . . . July ’61.’ queried for omission by Paine, alterations made by SLC He and his wife took passage in the steamer for home in Keokuk. 1871 1871 (1871) typed in the margin (1871.) inset About 1871 or ’72 they came to New York. They were obliged to go somewhere. They were obliged to go somewhere. They were obliged to go somewhere. They were obliged to go somewhere. not in Orion had been trying to make a living in the law ever since he had arrived from the Pacific coast coast Coast , but he had secured only two cases. Those he was to try free of charge—but the possible result will never be known, because the parties settled the cases cases case cases cases out of court without his help. I had bought my mother a house in Keokuk. I was giving her a stated sum monthly, and Orion another stated sum. They all lived together in the house. Orion could have had all the work he wanted, at good wages, in the composing-room of the Gate City, (a daily paper) but his wife had been a Governor’s wife and she was not able to permit that degradation. It was better, in her eyes, that they live upon charity. I had . . . upon charity. I had . . . upon charity. I had . . . upon charity. queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC not in But, as I say, they came East and But, as I say, they came East and But, as I say, they came East and But, as I say, they came East and not in Orion got a job as proof-reader on the New York Evening Post Evening Post Evening Post “Evening Post” at ten dollars a week. They took a single small room, and in it they cooked, and lived on that money. They took a single small room, and in it they cooked, and lived on that money. They took a single small room, and in it they cooked, and lived on that money. They took a single small room, and in it they cooked, and lived on that money. queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC not in By and by Orion Orion Orion Orion he he came to Hartford and wanted me to get him a place as reporter on a Hartford paper. Here was a chance to try my scheme again, and I did it. I made him go to the Hartford Evening Post, Evening Post, Evening Post, Evening Post, “Evening Post,” without any letter of introduction, introduction, introduction, introduction, and propose to scrub and sweep and do all sorts of things for nothing, on the plea that he didn’t need money but only needed work, and that that that that that that that that that was what he was pining for. Within six weeks he was on the editorial staff of that paper at twenty dollars a week, and he was worth the money. He was presently called for by some other paper at better wages, but I made him go to the Post Post Post “Post” people and tell them about it. They stood the raise and kept him. It was the pleasantest berth he had ever had in his life. It was an easy berth. He was in every way comfortable. But ill luck ill luck ill-luck came. It was bound to come. A new Republican daily was to be started in Rutland, Vermont, Rutland, Vermont, Rutland, Vermont, Rutland, Vermont, a New England city a New England city by a stock company of well-to-do well-to-do well-to-do well-to-do politicians, and they offered him him Orion Orion him him the chief editorship at three thousand a year. He was eager to accept. His wife was equally eager—no, twice as eager, three times as eager. His wife . . . as eager. His wife . . . as eager. His wife . . . as eager. queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC not in My beseechings and reasonings went for nothing. I said, “You said, [¶] “You said, ¶ “You said, [¶] “You are as weak as water. Those people will find it out right away. They will easily see that you have no back-bone back-bone backbone ; that they can deal with you as they would deal with a slave. You may last six months, but not longer. Then they will not dismiss you as they would dismiss a gentleman: they gentleman: they gentleman:. Tthey period mended to a colon gentleman: they gentlemean: they will fling you out as they would fling out an intruding tramp.” It happened just so. Then he he Orion Orion he he and his wife migrated to that persecuted and unoffending that persecuted and unoffending that persecuted and unoffending that persecuted and unoffending not in Keokuk once more. Orion wrote from there that he was not resuming the law; that he law; that he law; that. Hhe law; that he thought that what his health needed was the open air, in some sort of outdoor outdoor out-door outdoor occupation; occupation; occupation—; occupation; that his old old old old not in father-in-law had a strip of ground on the river border a mile above Keokuk with some sort of a house on it, and his idea was to buy that place and start a chicken farm and provide Keokuk with chickens and eggs, and perhaps butter—but I don’t know whether you can raise butter on a chicken farm or not. He said the place could be had for three thousand dollars cash, cash, cash, cash, and I sent the money. He He Orion Orion He He began to raise chickens, and he made a detailed monthly report to me, me, me, me, whereby it appeared that he was able to work off his chickens on the Keokuk people at a dollar and a quarter a pair. But it also appeared that it cost a dollar and sixty cents to raise the pair. This did not seem to discourage Orion, and so I let it go. Meantime he was borrowing a a one a a hundred dollars per month of me regularly, month by month. Now to show Orion’s stern and rigid stern and rigid handsome stern and rigid stern and rigid business ways—and he really prided himself on his large business capacities—the moment he received the advance of a a one a a hundred dollars at the beginning of each month, he always always not in always always sent me his note for the amount, and with it he sent, out of that money, three months’ interest out of that money, three months’ interest out of that money, three months’ interest ‘three months’ interest’ underscored out of that money, three months’ interest ‘out of that money’ underscored out of that money, three months’ interest on the hundred dollars at 6 6 six per cent cent cent. per annum, these notes being always for three months. I did not keep them of course. They were of no value to anybody. I did . . . to anybody. I did . . . to anybody. I did . . . to anybody. bracketed for possible by Paine, then deleted by SLC not in As I say, he always sent a detailed statement of the month’s profit and loss on the chickens—at least the month’s loss on the chickens—and this detailed statement included the various items of expense—corn for the chickens, a bonnet for the wife, a bonnet for the wife, a bonnet for the wife, a bonnet for the wife, not in boots for himself, and so on; even carfares carfares carfares car fares , and the weekly contribution of ten cents to help out the missionaries who were trying to damn the Chinese after a plan not satisfactory to those people. But at last when among those details I found twenty-five dollars for pew-rent I struck. I told him to change his religion and sell the pew. But at last . . . pew-rent . . . sell the pew. But at last . . . pew-rent . . . sell the pew. But at last . . . pew-rent . . . sell the pew. queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC not in