14 July 1908 Dictated at Innocence at Home, July 14, 1908 Mr. Clemens comments upon Norman Hapgood’s eulogy of President Roosevelt in Collier’s Weekly for July 11th. The principal editorial comment in Collier’s Weekly for July 11th contains seven or eight sentences—short ones, therefore it is a brief paragraph. It is a wonderful accumulation of rubbish to be packed into so small a space. It is a burst of servile and insane admiration and adulation of President Roosevelt. It purports to be a reflection of the sentiment of the nation; that is to say, the Republican bulk of the nation. It ought to grieve me to concede that it does reflect the sentiment of the Republican bulk of the nation, but it doesn’t. To my mind, the bulk of any nation’s opinion about its president, or its king, or its emperor, or its politics, or its religion, is without value, and not worth weighing or considering or examining. There is nothing mental in it; it is all feeling, and procured at second-hand without any assistance from the proprietor’s reasoning powers. On the other hand, it would grieve me deeply to be obliged to believe that any very large number of sane and thinking and intelligent Republicans privately admire Mr. Roosevelt, and do not despise him. Publicly, all sane and intelligent Republicans worship Mr. Roosevelt, and would not dare to do otherwise where any considerable company of listeners was present; and this is quite natural, since sane and intelligent human beings are like all other human beings, and carefully and cautiously and diligently conceal their private real opinions from the world and give out fictitious ones in their stead, for general consumption. Norman Hapgood wrote that paragraph. He is an able young man; well read, well educated, and as honest and honorable as any man whom I am as intimately acquainted with as I am with him. But do I believe that this diseased paragraph came out of his private heart, and reflects his real feeling toward this disgraced outgoing President President president ? No, I am not able to believe that. If I had him here in private a while I should expect him to find it very difficult to put his finger on half a dozen considerable benefits conferred upon this country since he ceased to be President President president , four years ago, and became Czar. Hapgood’s paragraph begins thus: MR. ROOSEVELT WILL LEAVE OFFICE secure in the hearts of his countrymen. The dexterity and sincerity with which he avoided a renomination for himself, and secured it for a believer in his policies, have solidified the affection and the confidence of mankind. That sentence is itself about as dexterous as was the Presidential Presidential presidential dexterity which it admired. The sentence mixes together a possibly creditable act and a distinctly discreditable one, and the mixing is so cleverly done as to divert attention from the discreditable one and make one or two important words seem to apply to it as well as to the other member of the sentence, when, in fact, no such application of those words is justifiable. That wily wily wiley sentence should be bitten in two and each half of it chewed by itself: “The dexterity and sincerity with which he avoided a renomination for himself—” That half of the sentence is true. No, that is putting it too strong; it isn’t quite true. If we leave the “dexterity” out and put in “reluctance,” then it is true. Mr. Roosevelt did avoid a renomination of himself, after trying for two years to find some decent way to get out of his bombastic pledges and renunciations of the great office for all future time. The public press kept after him like a swarm of bees, and they pestered and pestered him for two years before they were able to sting a definite and final renunciation out of him. And so we will leave the “dexterity” out of that half of the sentence and put “reluctance” in its place, as being some four hundred thousand miles nearer the truth—but “dexterity” comes good, and exceedingly good, in the last half of that sentence: “The dexterity with which he secured the nomination for a believer in his policies—” Yes, he dexterously secured Mr. Taft’s Taft’s Tafft’s nomination. But dexterity doesn’t cover the whole ground; it needs the help of some more words, in order that the whole truth may be arrived at. The dexterity itself needs these qualifying words; mere dexterity carries with it a suggestion of compliment, but no compliment is due in this case. The President’s dexterity in the matter of Mr. Taft’s Taft’s Tafft’s nomination was a dishonest and dishonorable dexterity—the same kind used by him when he jumped that horse-doctor, Leonard Wood, over the heads of fifty regular army brigadiers, real soldiers, and made that Rooseveltian flunky a Major General Major General major-general by help of the famous “interval,” a trick which was merely and simply a lie and a swindle; and also—so to speak—a criminal assault upon the Senate. The President’s act was not superior in respectability to the raping of a blind idiot—a blind and very reluctant idiot, a pleading idiot, a beseeching idiot; in fact that was just about what the Senate was—a blind and rapable idiot, and upon her the President accomplished his hellish purpose, as the Western papers used to say, fifty years ago, in these cases. Criticism of Norman Hapgood’s eulogy of President Roosevelt, continued. Examined by the facts of Mr. Roosevelt’s Presidential Presidential presidential career, the rest of Mr. Hapgood’s paragraph becomes matter for laughter: Turned aside by none of the flattering and plausible arguments which were daily showered upon him, he gave up power, kept his word, and set a high example. Scarcely was Mr. Taft nominated when the President gave another example of his quality by springing enthusiastically to the aid of Heney, Spreckels, and their friends in San Francisco, at a time when the current had set strongly in the opposite direction. A few days more, and, in his praise of Cleveland, Mr. Roosevelt once again struck with hearty truthfulness those notes which celebrate earnestness and the truth. He has been a good Police Commissioner, a good Governor, a good President, and a good man. Twenty years of active life may still be his. Meanwhile he has already done splendid service for a thankful nation. In what way has Mr. Roosevelt given up power? He hasn’t given it up; he has merely gone through the form of transferring it to his serf, Mr. Taft, who runs to him daily with the docility of a spaniel to get his permission to do things. Taft even carries his speech of acceptance to his master to be edited and made the utterance of the master, not the voice of the serf. In what way has the President set a high example? Is it a high example for a president of the United States to keep his word? Is keeping one’s word such a very extraordinary thing, when the person achieving the feat is the first citizen of a civilized nation? It could be a compliment to say of a burglar that he has kept his word and has thereby set a high example for the other burglars, but it is probably the poorest compliment that has ever been fired at a president of the United States up to this time. And yet there is some little reason why Hapgood should consider it a compliment, and praiseworthy, in this President’s President’s president’s case, for this President President president has never been servilely addicted to keeping his word. A man’s acts are also his word. Look at Mr. Roosevelt. He is always vaporing about purity, and righteousness, and fairness, and justice, just the same as if he really respected those things and regarded himself as their pet champion, whereas there is little or nothing in his history to show that he even knows the meaning of those words. Mr. Roosevelt’s character and conduct have undergone many changes since he rose upon the political horizon and became notorious, but the changes are not to his credit, since they have been persistently not for the better but for the worse. Years ago he was the champion and vigorous fighter for civil service reform, and in this character he won the strong and outspoken praises of a public sick unto death of the spoils system. This was before he was President. The other day this stately foe of the blending of public office with politics, sent three hundred federal office-holders to represent his interests at the Republican Convention in Chicago and help nominate his shadow. Mr. Roosevelt is always talking about his policies, but he is discreetly silent about his principles. If he has any principles they look so like policies that they cannot be told from that commodity, and they have that commodity’s chiefest earmark—the quality of impermanency, a disposition to fade out and disappear at convenience. In the matter of justice and fairness, he evidently has no fixed idea; he talks fairness and justice noisily, but he is quite ready to sacrifice these things to expediency at any time, and apparently without a pang. He admires the dime-novel hero, and has always made him his model, but he has always failed to “make good,” as the slang phrase has it; he has always been ready to do the fine and spectacular hero-act, and he has always been equally ready to wish he had let it alone when he found that it pleased only half of the people and not the other half. Six or seven years ago he had a chance to do some dime-novel heroics and he eagerly accepted the opportunity to make a big sensation and set the whole American world applauding —applauding his nerve, his courage, his daring. He invited a negro to lunch with him at the White House, and the negro did it. That was Booker T. Washington, a man worth a hundred Roosevelts, a man whose shoe-latchets Mr. Roosevelt is not worthy to untie. A negro feeding at the White House table! The storm that burst on us from one end of the country to the other must have enthused the circus soul of the little imitation cowboy to the utmost limit, for a few hours, for the whole eighty millions were helping to make that noise, but when the inspirer of it found that it wasn’t all praise, but that the Southern half of it was furious censure, it was not in his nature to remain happy. I am speaking as if I knew. I think I do know; I think I know he was an unhappy man over that incident. For this reason: there was a freshet of honorary degrees at Yale, and the President was there to get part of the ducking, and I was there on the same errand, and there were sixty more, gowned and hooded for baptism. The President asked me if I thought he was right in inviting Booker Washington to lunch at the White House. I judged by his tone that he was worried and troubled and sorry about that showy adventure, and wanted a little word of comfort and approval. I said it was a private citizen’s privilege to invite whom he pleased to his table, but that perhaps a president’s liberties were more limited; that if a president’s duty required him, there was no alternative, but that in a case where it was not required by duty, it might be best to let it alone, since the act would give offence offence offense to so many people when no profit to the country was to be gained by offending them. I didn’t tell him all I thought about it—we never do that; we keep half of what we think hidden away on our inside and only deliver ourselves of that remnant of it which is proper for general consumption. Privately, I thought it a president’s duty to refrain from offending the nation merely to advertise himself and make a noise, but I didn’t say that. But I believed that he would not leave that mistake of his alone; I believed he would watch for a chance to rectify it and get himself back into Southern favor. His opportunity came, by and by, and he seized it with avidity, and instantly made himself as splendidly popular in the South as Alexander VI VI VI. is in hell. It was the Brownsville incident that gave him his chance. Some unimaginable ass in the War Department—surely not Taft—and it couldn’t be Taft anyway, because Taft was always away from home around the globe somewhere electioneering for Roosevelt at the nation’s expense—ordered the 25th Colored Infantry to take post at Brownsville, on the Mexican border. The Brownsville people heard of this proposition, and they implored the War Department to not fling this firebrand into their midst; that the sight of a nigger soldier could not be endured by Texans and disaster must certainly follow if the colored soldiers came there. Whoever was doing the particular assing in the War Office at that time paid no attention to these appeals. The negro soldiers went into barracks there, and by and by the prophesied hatred and bad blood manifested itself between the two colors, and presently there was some shooting done at midnight, manifestly with government government Government arms and by negro soldiers. To please the Brownsville folk, the Government did several strange and shabby things: it sent a commission of officers of the regular army down there to take testimony and they took it; took such of it as would go toward convicting some of the negro soldiers and stopped there—they were not interested in any testimony that could go to the favor of those men. By the testimony of Captain McDonald, Texan Ranger, a man whose character for veracity is well established, the Government and its agents acted in a shabby and dishonest and dishonorable way from the beginning to the end. Mr. Roosevelt was anxious to convict some of those soldiers and thus get back into Southern favor, but as he was not able to do it he did the next best thing; he convicted the entire command himself, without evidence and without excuse, and dismissed them from the army, adding those malignant and cowardly words, “without honor.” How long would it take me to set down a list of the acts and utterances of the President which are at variance with Norman Hapgood’s estimate of Mr. Roosevelt as crystallized in his closing sentence? It would take me a good while; too long for this day and this weather, and so I will leave that interminable list unregistered until another time. But meantime, I find this editorial in an old newspaper—a New York Herald of something more than a month ago. The writer of it seems to me to know Mr. Roosevelt pretty well: PRESIDENT TAFT—Roosevelt’s Reign of Terror Over. William H. Taft is the next President of the United States—provided the Democratic National Convention nominates William J. Bryan. It is an office for which Mr. Taft has conspicuous qualifications. But best of all, his nomination means the end of Roosevelt and Rooseveltism. It means the end of personal government, of autocratic régime, of militarism, of jingoism, of rough-riderism, of administration by shouting and clamor, tumult and denunciation. It means the end of the Roosevelt reign of terror and the restoration of the Presidency to its historical dignity under the Constitution. Even Andrew Johnson, in his periods of sobriety, had more innate respect for the office itself, for its traditions and for appearances than Mr. Roosevelt has shown. Never before was there such a lawless President. Never before was the Presidency so deliberately lowered to gratify a love for studied and sensational theatricalism. Mr. Taft’s nomination means the end of the most shocking extravagance known in the history of the country; the most extraordinary contempt for economy and retrenchment that any Executive ever displayed; the most irresponsible clamor for bigger navies by absurd appeals to the war spirit and absurd threats of foreign enemies; the most reckless disregard of constitutional limitations and constitutional checks and balances. Every serious, thoughtful citizen can now breathe more freely, and feel that the Republic is safer, having withstood another searching test of its right to endure.