22 August 1907 Dictated August August Aug. 22, 1907 Luncheon with Henniker Heaton Henniker Heaton Henniker-Heaton and discussion of cheap ocean postage—Mr. Clemens’s postal check scheme. Ashcroft’s note: “Lunched with Henniker Heaton Henniker Heaton Henniker-Heaton , M.P., at the House of Commons; dined with Mr. and Mrs. Harry Brittain at the Savoy.” The luncheon had a purpose, and lasted two hours, but it didn’t last long enough to get down to the purpose. The twelve or fifteen men present had been chosen with an eye to that purpose, which was political and commercial, and of international importance. Mr. Mr. Mr. Sydney Buxton, the Postmaster General Postmaster General Postmaster-General , was present, also T. P. O’Connor, M.P., also the Earl of Crawford and Balcarres Balcarres Balcarras . I think all the rest were M.P.’s. I understood that all present favored the scheme—or rather the two schemes, for there were two; I had a scheme and Henniker Heaton Henniker Heaton Henniker-Heaton had a scheme, and our idea was to join our strength and work for both schemes; both were to be freely discussed at the luncheon, and I was to have a private heart to heart talk with the Postmaster General Postmaster General Postmaster-General afterwards. Henniker Heaton Henniker Heaton Henniker-Heaton has for years been the diligent, acute, and tireless apostle of cheap ocean postage, and in spite of all kinds of official and parliamentary opposition— opposition— opposition, — except the intelligent kind— kind— kind, — he has carried the bulk of his dream to a successful conclusion. He had a hard time proving to doubting Parliaments and postmasters general postmasters general postmasters-general that if postage to the British colonies and to far-off far-off far-off India should be reduced from five cents to two, the resulting tremendous addition to business and social correspondence would keep the revenue up to the high-water mark and secure the Government from loss, but by pluck and perseverance he succeeded. To-day you can send a letter to any British postoffice postoffice post-office anywhere on the surface of the globe for two cents; no harm has happened to the revenue, the cheapened postage has formidably augmented export business, and the whole nation has profited thereby. Henniker Heaton Henniker Heaton Henniker-Heaton is now laboring laboring laboring and hoping to establish a two-cent rate with all foreign countries, including the United States. Present conditions exhibit curious anomalies. For instance: the postage on a letter mailed direct from England to New York City is five cents; but if you send it to New York by way of Canada by way of Canada by way of Canada ‘by way of Canada’ underscored , the expense is only two cents, although the distance is greater. You can send merchandise in a liner from London to New York at at and back at ten dollars per ton, but the same ship charges ten times as much per ton for mail matter, while the expense involved in caretaking and transportation is no greater in the one case than in the other. Henniker Heaton Henniker Heaton Henniker-Heaton is finding it as difficult to enlighten and convert our Congresses as if they were just British Parliaments, and no whit saner. My project was a postal check—a notion which I conceived conceived invented conceived and elaborated in Vienna about the end of 1897, and further elaborated and ultimately ultimately ultimately completed in the summer and fall and fall and fall of 1898. Our minister at the Court Court court of Vienna at the time was Charlemagne Tower, our present Ambassador Ambassador ambassador to the Court Court court of Berlin. He examined it carefully, in detail, and decided that it was good and workable, and that it would abolish our clumsy and stupid postal order system, and would also put a stop to the vast and growing and risky business of sending postage-stamps through the mail in payment for small purchases. A few days afterward I read my elaborated scheme to two other men—one of them an old friend in the insurance business, the other a new acquaintance. This document was intended for publication as a magazine article, and I have it yet, much scored by emendations, much damaged by handling, but still intact and legible. In London a year later, (’99, if my memory is sound), I came across a Harper’s Weekly with a paragraph in it which interested me. It named a member of Congress, and said he was about to bring forward a bill for a postal check, and then went on and described my check with nice exactness. I judged that that young acquaintance of mine in Vienna Vienna Venice had admired my scheme enough to talk about it, and that its details had finally wandered to America and fallen under the attention of that Congressman Congressman congressman . My name was not mentioned, but the omission was of no consequence to me; I hoped the man would push the project in Congress and make a success of it. I thought I might be able to help him, so I sent a copy of my article to McClure for publication in his magazine; I also pinned to it the clipping from Harper’s Weekly. I thought it likely that he might question the value of the article the article it the article now that the clipping revealed the fact that what I was saying was lacking in freshness, and my conjecture was right; McClure did not publish it. it. the article. it. I never heard of that Congressman Congressman congressman or his postal check afterward. I think he was a Tennesseean, but am not sure. A year or a year and a half ago, I read in the American American American Review of Reviews a description of a project by a Northern Congressman Congressman congressman whereby the transmission of money by mail was to be much simplified, and at the same time rendered convenient and safe. It did not seem to me that this invention, as described and explained, invention, as described and explained, invention, as described and explained, was much of an improvement upon existing conditions, still it was a step in the right direction, and I was gratified. At my request, Dr. Shaw, editor of the Review of Reviews, called at my house and I gave him my battered article, explained it to him, and suggested that he send it to his friend, that Congressman Congressman congressman , to the end that he might make use of it in case he should see his way to it. I heard no more of the matter until four or five days ago; then a parcel reached me from the Review of Reviews containing my ancient article and some other documents concerning the matter of postal checks. Also, a fresh copy of my article with “emendations;” also an invitation to aid the good cause. Also, a fresh . . . good cause. Also, a ty fresh copy of my article with “emendations;” also an invitation to aid the good cause. I find the documents interesting. One of them is House Bill 7053, entitled “A Bill to Prevent Robbing the Mail, to Provide a Safer and Easier Method of Sending Money by Mail, and to Increase the Postal Revenue. Revenue. Revenue.” Introduced December 13, 1905, by Mr. Gardner of Michigan; referred to the Committee on the Post-Office and Post-Roads, and ordered to be printed.” printed.” printed. I like the bill very much. In all its essentials it is my scheme as mapped out in my article written in Vienna in ’98 and ’99. ’99. finished and elaborated in February ’99. ’99. There are some printed slips in which the various merits of a postal check are ably and urgently argued; they are the same ones used by me in my article; I do not perceive that one has been omitted. The earliest date mentioned is 1902—two or three years after my scheme leaked into print as per the paragraph published in Harper’s Weekly, as heretofore mentioned. In these documents the scheme is called the “invention” “invention” “invention” of a Mr. W. C. Post. It is stated, with a trace of conscious magnanimity, that he stands ready to confer it upon the Government as a free gift; he wants no money. Why, Why, Why, even that idea is not original. In ’98 I wrote John Hay, from Vienna, Vienna, Washington, Vienna, and said I had invented a postal check scheme, and asked him to talk to the Postmaster General Postmaster General Postmaster-General about it. I remarked that the Government would not be likely to be willing to buy it of me, because upon examination the War Department War Department Government War Department would perceive that you you it you couldn’t kill Christians with it, and therefore the Government the Government the Government would naturally take but a slight interest in it. Mr. Post heard about that, probably, from John Hay, or others in Washington, and it has admonished him to be magnanimous. However, I am wandering far afield. I will inter that old postal-check article of mine in an Appendix, where the curious may find it if they want it—and now let us get back to London. [¶] However, I . . . to London. single rule canceled [¶] However, I am wandering far afield. I will fling inter that old postal-check article of mine into an Appendix, where the curious may find it if they want it—and now let us get back to London.