27 August 1907 Dictated August August Aug. 27, 1907 Whitelaw Reid’s reception, which Mr. Clemens was unable to attend—Remarks about Whitelaw Reid’s career. I was not able to go to Whitelaw Reid’s afternoon reception of the American contingent, and so my ticket, (No. 2384), remained unused. The tickets suggest that the national function was conducted on a new plan. It was. It had not been the custom, before, to admit by ticket; any American could come that wanted to, and sometimes five hundred came, sometimes a thousand. In the present case, as usual, case, as usual, case, as usual, there was no restriction; any American could come who applied for a ticket; four thousand applied, and they were all there. It must have been that our Ambassador Ambassador ambassador was proposing to provide refreshments, and needed to know what quantity would be required. Reid occupies the most palatial private residence in London, and a crush could be expected, for all the Americans would be eager to see it. It was indeed a crush, and half as many people were in it as were present at the King’s great garden party at Windsor, which was attended by a multitude somewhat exceeding eight thousand; still the big house was equal to the emergency. Reid’s salary is $17,500, and it pays the hire of all his domestic servants servants service servants except that of his cooks; I am speaking of the service in his town house—he has another great palace in the country. His town house rent is a hundred thousand dollars a year, and he has other expenses, but they are not a burden to him. He and his predecessor, John Hay, were salaried members of the New York Tribune staff when I first knew them; both married unnumbered millions of dollars. Hay was a man of great and varied talents and accomplishments, and was conspicuously well equipped for the several great national and international posts which he had filled in his brilliant career; and he climbed to several of them without the help of wealth, and would doubtless have climbed the rest of the way without that help, and all the public would have approved, and would also have affectionately applauded and rejoiced. But the like is not the case with Reid. He is educated educated eductaed ‘t’ and ‘a’ marked to transpose but not accomplished; his talents are few and not distinguished; he is not actually and precisely commonplace, but comes dangerously near to being that; he can write out a good enough speech, and can deliver it well enough, and with dignity, but he cannot stir a house with it—it gives off no real fire, for there is no real fire in him, and his imitations of it are not effective; they are artificial, and they ring hollow. He is narrow, and hard, cold, calculating, unaffectionate, except toward his family and a very small circle of especial friends; his dislikes are strong and steady and lasting, and he is unforgiving. He was born with a good commercial head, and has improved it by experience, but he has no other talent that perceptibly rises toward distinction. It has served him well. By grace of it he moved up, step by step, from war correspondent to a staff position on the Tribune under Greeley; to managing editor; to part proprietor; to proprietor-in-chief proprietor-in-chief proprietor in chief ; to political importance, by right of this powerful position; to minister to France and candidate for Vice President Vice President vice-president , partly by the same right but mainly by authority of the millions which he had meantime married; to special envoy to Queen Victoria’s Jubilee, by right of these combined forces; and finally to his present post, the highest in the diplomatic service—again by authority of those forces. He was not shiningly equipped for any of the conspicuous positions which he has occupied; he has not made a shining record in any of them, but he has made a creditable record in all of them. He is disliked by many, liked by few, envied by a multitude, and admired by nobody. He is a typical American product—a product hardly producible elsewhere, but easily producible among us. He is a good sample of what money, push, steady-going energy, pertinacity, and a reasonably good business talent—unsubject to damaging excitements and gushing excitements and gushing excitements and gushing enthusiasms—can do for a man in our republic, where high ideals are not a requisite, nor indeed a help, but distinctly a hindrance. help, but distinctly a hindrance. help., but distinctly a hindrance. Probably it is only with us that a Whitelaw Reid can climb to the loftiest ambassadorship in the country’s gift, a Leonard Wood to the highest position in the army, and a Theodore Roosevelt be implored by the whole nation to accept a third term and do his singular insanities all over again. again. again. single rule canceled