18 May 1907 Tuxedo, May 18, 1907 Taking up the thread of dictation again after a silence of a month or more—Four hundred thousand Four hundred thousand 400,000 words of Autobiography already dictated—The opening of the Actors’ Fund Fair—The trip to the Jamestown Exposition in Mr. Rogers’s yacht—The proposed trip to England on June 8th to receive honorary degree from Oxford University—Copy of poem “To Mark Twain.” It seems a long time since I have done any dictating; and it really is a long time, though not so long as it seems, perhaps. In March, after a second trip to Bermuda, I made a pretense of working, but it probably amounted to nothing more than a pretense, substantially. But I am not grieving about it; I am not reproaching myself. If I could have gotten more pleasure, more comfort, more satisfaction, out of dictating autobiography than I could get out of other forms of play, I should have gone on dictating, instead of seeking other forms of amusement. During a stretch of thirty-five years I exercised my pen, in my trade of authorship, in the summertime summertime summer-time and in the summertime summertime summer-time only. I worked three months in the year and amused myself in other ways during the other nine. My average literary output for the thirty-five years was short of seventy thousand words a year; but since I began to dictate, on the 9th of January 1906, I have not limited myself to the summer vacation as a working time but have spread my labors over all the months. Last March, when I went to Bermuda the second time, I estimated that I had dictated four hundred thousand words in the previous thirteen or fourteen months; I recognized that I had put together enough Autobiography, if spread through my existing books, to secure for those books a twenty-eight years’ renewal of copyright life, and as that renewal, in the interest of the bread and butter of my daughters, renewal, in . . . daughters, renewal, in . . . daughters, had been the Autobiography’s main object, I did not care whether I added anything to that Autobiography or not; indeed I rather formally retired from all human industries and set apart the remaining weeks or years of my life to be observed and enjoyed by me as a holiday—the first very real one in a lifetime lifetime life-time of seventy years and upwards. This has a nonsensical sound, for I am not able to disguise from myself the fact that my life for the past thirty-five years and more has really been nothing more nor less than one long holiday, with three months’ scribbling in each year which other people dignified with the great name of “work,” “work,” “work,” but which to me was not work at all, but only play, delicious play, and was never a result of compulsion or of the prodding of conscience, but only of a strong desire to entertain myself. Many things which I have wanted to talk about have happened in the past month or two, but they are ancient history now—let them go. I helped to open the Actors’ Fund Fair on the 6th of this present month. We raised seventy-five thousand dollars for the Fund. I went down to Jamestown in Mr. Rogers’s yacht, the Kanawha Kanawha Kanawha , and saw the opening of the World’s Fair there. Two or three days of fog followed, and Mr. Rogers and all the guests except Mr. Broughton Broughton Broughdeton and I got tired and went back home by rail, but we waited a couple of days; then the fog lifted in the night for a moment and we got to sea and came through to New York without any trouble, although the newspapers said the vessel had gone to the bottom and carried us along with it. Meantime, I have been invited by Oxford University to receive an honorary degree on the 26th of June, and shall sail on that quest on the 8th. I have made no effort to conceal the fact that I am vain of this distinction. Sometimes they catch an illustrious American who has wandered to the English shores on his own affairs, and Oxford transfigures him with a degree, but I am one of the very few that have been I am one of the very few that have been so far as I can learn I am the first one that has been I am one of the very few that have been sent for from over the ocean. I like compliments, praises, flatteries; I cordially enjoy all such things, and am grieved and disappointed when what I call a “barren mail” “barren mail” “barren mail” arrives—a mail that hasn’t any compliments in it. I am always trying to find plausible excuses for copying these tributes into this Autobiography, but at cost of a good deal of pain I I I of refrain from doing it. However, I mean to break the rule, to-day, for yesterday’s mail brought me from Texas a complimentary poem which is so fine and so sincere—and I hope I may say affectionate— —and I hope I may say affectionate— —and I hope I may say affectionate— that I want it to live, and am not willing to suppress it. It is by a judge on the bench. To Mark Twain. We crave as guerdon of our unsought birth, Some height to scale, some glory to attain; And in our march we fill the wayward earth earth earth, (Kirlicks) earth, With monuments portraying joy or pain, Or the cold factors of some loss or gain, As Selfishness or Love our being sways. How few are they who reach that higher plane Of Life’s broad triumph, where its quiet days Shine with more light and hope, and far serener rays. But thou hast gained an eminence thine own, Beyond the reach of envy or of blame; And of all human passions, love alone Will cherish and perpetuate thy name, With other mortals of immortal fame, As bearer of the tidings tidings tidings, tidings, that on earth earth earth, earth, Our hopes, our dreads, our sorrows are the same; And he the only gainer from his birth birth birth, birth, Who mingles with his toil toil toil, toil, God’s boon of joy and mirth. mirth. mirth. mirth. John A. Kirlicks. The sunny humour of thy useful life life life, life, Hath filled with gladness many a cheerless mind, mind, mind,— mind, Equipped it for a nobler, better strife, Against the faults and follies of mankind. Philosopher and humourist combined! To whom at last a Voice shall cry “well done.” By thee e’en wretchedness shall solace find, For thou hast brought—and thereby glory won— Good will to all thy kind, and malice unto none. The world is happier in that thou wert born: Thy gift to man is never draped in woe, But diamonded in laughter, as the morn With dew drops greets the Day-King’s early glow; And we would have thee, while in life, to know How strong from every warm and buoyant breast breast breast, breast, Love and love’s attributes around thee grow. If these beget a blessing—thou art blessed, As in our hearts thou liv’st an ever welcome guest. John A. Kirlicks. John A. Kirlicks. John A. Kirlicks. signature handwritten John A. Kirlicks.