7 June 1906 Thursday, June 7, 1906 The difficulties of Clara’s position during her mother’s and Jean’s illness—The Susy Crane letter—Mr. Clemens’s Clemens’s Clemens’ Clemens’s version of Mr. Howells’s story—Taking Mrs. Clemens to Florence, and her death, there. Several times, in letters written to friends, in those days, I furnished illustrations of the difficulties of Clara’s position. One of these letters was written to Susy Crane at the end of 1902, two months and a half after we had come back from York Harbor. Some days before Christmas, Jean came in from a long romp in the snow, in the way of coasting, skeeing, and so on, with the young Dodges, and she sat down, perspiring, with her furs on, and was was she was was presently struck with a violent chill. She fell into the doctor’s hands at once, and by Christmas Eve was become very ill. The disease was double pneumonia. From that time onward, to and beyond the date of this letter, her case was alarming. During all this time her mother never suspected that anything was wrong. She questioned Clara every day concerning Jean’s health, spirits, clothes, employments spirits, clothes, employments spirits, and clothes, and employments, spirits, clothes, employments and amusements, and how she was enjoying herself; and Clara furnished the information right along, in minute detail—every word of it false, of course. Every day she had to tell how Jean dressed; and in time she got so tired of using Jean’s existing clothes over and over again, and trying to get new effects out of them, that finally, as a relief to her hard-worked invention hard-worked invention hard-worked invention, hard-worked invention she got to adding imaginary clothes to Jean’s wardrobe, and would probably have doubled it and trebled it if a warning note in her mother’s comments had not admonished her that she was spending more money on these spectral gowns and things than the family income justified. Of course Jean had to have a professional nurse, and a woman named Tobin was engaged for that office. Jean’s room was at the other end of the house from her mother’s quarters; and so, so, so, so, doctors and nurses could come and go without their presence being detected by Mrs. Clemens. During the middle, or the end, of January, January, January, January, Jean had become able to be about, and the doctor doctor Doctor ordered a change of scene for her. He said she must be taken South, to Old Point Comfort, and this was done. Katy and Miss Tobin accompanied her, and she remained at Old Point Comfort several weeks. The orders were to stay six weeks, but neither Jean nor Katy could endure that trained nurse, and they returned to Riverdale before the term was up. During the whole of Jean’s absence Mrs. Clemens was happy in the thought that she was on the premises; that she was in blooming health; that she was having as joyous a time as any young girl in the region. Clara kept her mother posted, every day, concerning Jean’s movements. On one day she would report Jean as being busy with her wood-carving; the next day she would have Jean hard at work at her language-studies language-studies language-studies language-studies ; the day after, she would report Jean as being busy typewriting literature for me. In the course of time she got as tired of these worn stage-properties stage-properties stage-properties stage-properties as she had of Jean’s clothes, before. I will here insert the Susy Crane letter. no line space I . . . letter. line space (I . . . letter.) no line space I . . . letter. Clara’s Day. Clara’s Day. Clara’s Day. double rule Clara’s Day. single rule In bed, 9 p.m.Riverdale, Dec. 29/02. Susy dear, two Susy dear, two Susy dear, two Susy dear, *** tTwo hours ago, Clara was recounting her day to me. Of course I can’t get any of it right, there’s so much detail; but with your York York e York York Harbor experience of the hardships attendant upon sick-room lying, you will get an idea, at any rate, rate, rate rate, of what a time that poor child has every day, picking her way through traps and pitfalls, and just barely escaping destruction two or three times in every hour. [To-day. Jean’s other lung attacked; a crisis expected to-night—Dr. Janeway to be be t be be summoned in the morning. Our doctor is to stay all night.] Of course Clara does not go to her Monday lesson in New York in New York in New York in New York to-day, on Jean’s account—but forgets that fact, forgets that fact, judiciously forgets that fact, forgets that fact and enters her mother’s room (where she has no business to be,) (where she has no business to be,) (where she has n has no business to be,) corrected miswriting (where she has no business to be,) toward train-time, dressed in a wrapper. Livy. Why Clara, aren’t you going to your lesson? Clara. (Almost caught). Clara. (Almost caught). Clara, (almost caught). Clara, (almost caught). ‘(almost caught).’ underscored in pencil Yes. Livy. In that costume? Cl. Oh, no. L. Well, you can’t make your train, it’s impossible. Cl. Cl. Cl. Cl. I know, but I’m going to take the other one. L. Indeed that won’t do—you’ll be ever so much too late for your lesson. Cl. No, the lesson-time has been put an hour later. [Lie.] [Lie]. (Lie). (Lie). ‘(Lie).’ underscored in pencil L. (Satisfied. Then suddenly). (Satisfied. Then suddenly). (satisfied. Then suddenly) (Satisfied. Then suddenly). ‘(Satisfied. Then suddenly).’ underscored in pencil But Clara, that train and the late lesson together will make you late to Mrs. Hapgood’s luncheon. Cl. No, the train leaves fifteen fifteen 15 fifteen minutes earlier than it used to. [Lie.] [Lie]. (Lie). (Lie). ‘(Lie).’ underscored in pencil L. (Satisfied). (Satisfied). (satisfied.) (Satisfied.) ‘(Satisfied.)’ underscored in pencil Tell Mrs. Hapgood etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. &c &c &c &c. &c. &c. (which Clara promises to do which Clara promises to do which Clara promises to do ). Clara dear, after the luncheon—I hate to put this on you—but could you do two or three little shopping-errands for me?—it is a pity to send Miss Lyon Lyon Lyon Lyon all the way to New York all the way to New York so far all the way to New York all the way to New York for so little. Cl. Oh, it won’t trouble me a bit—I can do it. (Takes a list of the things she is to buy—a list which she will presently hand to Miss Lyon and send her to New York to make the purchases Takes . . . Lyon . . . purchases Takes . . . Lyon . . . purchases Takes . . . Lyon . . . purchases ‘Takes . . . purchases’ underscored and Lyon’s name suppressed in pencil ). L. (Reflectively). (Reflectively). (reflectively) (reflectively) ‘(reflectively)’ underscored in pencil What is that name? Tobin—Toby—no, it’s Tobin—Miss Tobin. Cl. Cl. Cl Cl. (Turning cold to the marrow, but exhibiting nothing—Miss Tobin is Jean’s trained nurse Turning . . . nurse turning . . . nurse turning . . . nurse ‘turning . . . nurse’ underscored in pencil ). What about Tobin—or Miss Tobin? Who is it? L. A nurse—trained nurse. They say she is very good, and not talkative. Have you seen her? Cl. (Desperately—not knowing anything to say in this mysterious emergency Desperately . . . emergency Desperately . . . emergency Desperately . . . emergency ‘Desperately . . . emergency’ underscored in pencil ). Seen her? A Miss Tobin? No. Who is it? L.(To Clara’s vast relief To Clara’s vast relief To Clara’s vast relief To Clara’s vast relief ‘To Clara’s vast relief’ underscored in pencil ). Oh, I don’t know. The doctor spoke of her—and praised her. I suppose it was a hint that we need another. But I didn’t respond, and he dropped the matter. Miss Sherry is enough; we don’t need another. If he approaches you about it, discourage him. I think it is time you were dressing, dear—remember and tell Mrs. Hapgood what I told you. [Exit Clara—still alive—finds Miss Sherry waiting in the hall. They rehearse some lies together for mutual protection. Clara goes and hovers around in Jean’s part of the house and pays her frequent visits of a couple of minutes but does not allow her to talk. At 3 or 4 p.m. takes the things Miss Lyon has brought from New York; studies over her part a little, then goes to her mother’s room.] [Exit . . . hall . . . 3 or 4 . . . Lyon . . . room.] [Exit . . . hall . . . 3 or 4 . . . Lyon . . . room.] (Exit . . . hall . . . three or four . . . Lyon . . . room.) ‘Exit . . . hall’ underscored in pencil, but not the rest of the passage; Lyon’s name suppressed in pencil Livy. It’s very good of you, dear. Of course if I had known it was going to be so snowy and drizzly and drizzly and drizzly and drizzly and sloppy I wouldn’t have asked you to buy them. Did you get wet? Cl. Oh, nothing to hurt. L. You took a cab, both ways? Cl. Not from the station from the station from the station from the station to the lesson—the weather was good enough till that was over. L. Well, now, tell me everything Mrs. Hapgood said. [Clara tells her a long story, avoiding novelties and surprises and anything likely to inspire questions difficult to answer; and of course detailing the menu, for if it had been the feeding of the five thousand, Livy would have insisted on knowing what kind of bread it was and how the fishes were served. By and by, while talking of something else—] [Clara . . . story, . . . five thousand . . . else—] [Clara . . . yarn— . . . 5,000 . . . else— (Clara . . . yarn— story, . . . 5,000 . . . else—— Livy.Clams!—in the end of December. Are you sure it was clams? Cl. I didn’t say cl— I meant blue-points. L. (Tranquillized). (Tranquillized). (Tranquillized.) (Tranquilized.) It seemed odd. What is Jean doing? Cl. She said she was going to do a little typewriting typewriting type-writing type-writing . [Lie, of course; Jean being hardly alive.] [Lie, of course; Jean being hardly alive.] [Lie, of course; Jean wasbeing dangerously ill.] being hardly alive.] (Lie, of course; Jean being hardly alive.) L. Has she been out to-day? Cl. Only a moment, right after luncheon. She was determined to go out again, but— L. How did you know she was out? Cl. (Saving herself in time). (Saving herself in time). (saving herself in time) Katy told me. She was determined to go out again in the rain and snow, but I persuaded her to stay in. L. (With moving and grateful admiration). (With moving and grateful admiration). (with moving and grateful admiration)— Clara you are wonderful! the wise watch you keep over Jean, and the influence you have over her; it’s so lovely of you, and I tied here and can’t take care of her myself. (And she goes on with these undeserved praises till Clara is expiring with shame). And . . . shame). And . . . shame.) How did John Howells seem yesterday? Cl. Oh, he was very well. Of course it seemed pretty desolate in that big dining room dining room dining-room with only two at table. L. Why only two? two? two? Where was J two? Cl. Cl. Cl. Cl. (Stupidly) Stupidly stupidly . Well—er—papa doesn’t count. L. But doesn’t Jean count? Cl. (Almost caught again). (Almost caught again). (almost caught again) (almost caught again) Why, yes, she counts of course,—makes up the number—but she doesn’t say anything—never talks. L. Did she walk with you? Cl. A little way. Then we met the Dodges and she went off coasting with them. L. (Wonderingly). (Wonderingly). (wonderingly.) Sunday? Cl. (Up a stump for a moment). (Up a stump for a moment). (up a stump for a moment.) (up a stump for a moment,) Well, they don’t every Sunday. They didn’t last Sunday. [Livy was apparently satisfied. Jean said, some weeks ago, that Clara is the only person who can tell her mother an improbable lie and get it believed; and that it is because Clara has never before told her any lies.] [Livy . . . said, some weeks ago, that . . . improbable . . . get it . . . has . . . lies.] [Livy . . . says said, some weeks ago, that . . . improbable . . . be get it . . . hasve . . . lies.] (Livy . . . said, some weeks ago, that . . . improbable . . . get it . . . has . . . lies.) L. When did Mark Hambourg Hambourg Hamburg come? Cl. Just as John was leaving. L. I kept waiting to hear the piano. Wasn’t it dull for him with no music? Why didn’t you take him to the piano? Cl. I did offer, but he had a headache. [Lie.] [Lie.] [Lie.] (Lie.) [The piano is too close to Jean—it would have disturbed her.] The piano . . . her. [The piano . . . her.] (The piano . . . her.) This is a pretty rude sketch, Aunt Aunt and aunt Aunt Sue, and all the fine things are left out—I mean the exceedingly close places which Clara is constantly getting into and then slipping out just alive by a happy miracle of impromptu subterfuge and fraud. The whole thing would be funny, if it were not so heart-breakingly pathetic and tragic. I have the strongest desire to call you to us, but the doctor wouldn’t let you see Livy; and if he did—but he wouldn’t. wouldn’t. wouldn’t. ! There wouldn’t. Dec. 30. 6 a.m. a.m.— a.m— a.m.— —(which is about dawn). dawn). dawn.) I have been up to Jean’s room, and find all quiet there—Jean sleeping. Miss Tobin whispered, “She has had a splendid night.” The doctor (and Clara) (and Clara) (and Clara) (and Clara) had put in an appearance a couple of times in the night and gone back to bed, finding things going well. SLC SLC SLC paraph S.L.C. When one considers that Clara had been practising practising practicing these ingenuities for two months and a half, and that she was to continue to practise practise practice them daily for a year and a half longer, one gets something of a realizing sense of the difficulties and perils of the office she was filling. I will furnish here another sample. sample. Letter to Reverend Joseph H. Twichell. sample. circled Twichell letter ‖ Letter to Twichell. ‖ Letter to Rev. Joseph H. Twichell. triple rule sample. Letter to Rev. Joseph H. Twichell. rule Letter to Reverend Joseph H. Twichell. Riverdale-on-the-Hudson Riverdale-on-the-Hudson Riverdale-on-the-Hudson Riverdale-on-the-Hudson. The Last day of a—in some respects— Tough Year, being a.d. 1902. Dear Joe— It is 10 a.m., and the post has just brought your good greeting of yesterday. Yesterday at mid-afternoon there was a memorable episode: I was in Livy’s presence two two 3 three two two minutes and odd, odd, 50 seconds!— fifty seconds!—odd, odd, (the trained nurse holding the watch in her hand) for the first time time time time in three and a half three and a half 3½ three and one- a half three and a half months. Livy was radiant! (And And And Joe, And Joe, And I didn’t spoil it by saying, “Jean “Jean “You poor unsuspecting thing, Jean “You poor unsuspecting thing, “Jean “Jean is lying low with pneumonia these seven days.”) seven days.”) 7 days.” double rule End of Chapter I double rule seven days.”) End of Chapter I. rule seven days.” [A [¶] [A no ¶ [A no ¶ [A [¶] (A good deal of the rest of the week, Joe, week, Joe, week, Joe, week, Joe, can be found in my Christmas Christmas Xmas Christmas story (Harper’s) (Harper’s) (Harper’s) entitled “Was it Heaven? Or Hell?” which is largely largely not in largely largely a true story and was written in York Harbor in August or September.] September.] September.] September.] September.) In that story mother and daughter are ill, and the lying is attended to by a pair of aged aunts—assisted by the doctor, of course, though I suppress his his his his his his share to make the story short. In this Riverdale home the liars are the doctor, Clara, and Miss Sherry (Livy’s trained nurse). Those are the regulars. I am to see Livy again to-day for two or three minutes, two or three minutes, 3½ minutes three two or minutes, and one-half minutes two or three minutes, and it is possible that she may say “Who was it you were talking with at breakfast?—I made out a man’s voice.” (And confuse me.) voice.” (And confuse me.) voice.” (And confuse me.) voice.” (And confuse me.) voice,” (And confuse me.) (The man was the doctor; he spends his nights here with Jean, and is not due to visit Livy until noon—he lives two or three two or three 2 or 3 two or three miles away.) She sent Miss Sherry down to ask that question, during breakfast. We three consulted, and sent back word it was a stranger. It will be like Livy to ask me what what what what originally ‘what’; underscore canceled what stranger it was. Therefore I am to go prepared with a stranger stranger stranger stranger originally ‘stranger’; underscore canceled stranger calculated to fill the bill. Yesterday morning the doctor left here at nine nine 9 nine and made his rounds in Yonkers, then came back and paid Livy his usual noon visit; but this morning he had a patient or so within half a mile of here, and to save travel travel work travel travel he thought it would be a good idea to go straight up to Livy from the breakfast table; so he sent up to say he had called in passing, and couldn’t he come up and see Livy now? Of course she said yes, and he went up. He ought to have kept still; still; his mouth shut; his mouth shut; still; still; but some devil of injudacity moved him to say— “Mr. Clemens says you are looking distinctly better than when he last saw you, you, you you, you, in York.” Livy was back at him instantly: “Why—have you seen him? How did you come to see him since yesterday afternoon?” Luckily the doctor did not exhibit exhibit loose his exhibit exhibit the joggle she had given him, but said composedly— “I ran across him in the hall a minute ago when I came in.” So then he had to get Miss Sherry outside and arrange with her to tell me that that was how he came to know my opinion of the patient’s looks. To make doubly sure he hunted me up and told me himself; then called Clara and instructed her; for although her watch is not in the forenoon, she takes Miss Sherry’s place a little while every morning while Miss Sherry goes down and plans Livy’s food food feed feeood food for the day with the cook. I am to see Livy a moment every afternoon until she has another bad night; night; night, night,; comma mended to a semicolon night; and I stand in dread, dread, dread; dread;, semicolon mended to a comma dread, for with all my practice I realize that in a sudden emergency I am but a poor clumsy liar, whereas a fine alert and capable emergency-liar is the only sort that is worth anything in a sick-chamber. Now Now Now Now originally ‘Now’; underscore canceled Now , Joe, just see what reputation can do. All Clara’s life she has told Livy the truth truth square square truth truth and now the reward comes: Clara lies to her three and a half three and a half 3½ three and one- a half three and a half hours every day, day, day, now, day, and Livy takes takes tranquilly takes tranquilly takes takes it all at par, whereas even when I tell her a truth a truth truth a truth a truth it isn’t worth much much a penny a penny much much without corroboration. corroboration. corroboration. Jean put it cleverly during the terrible days in York: [¶] “Clara is the only person who can tell mamma an improbable lie and get it believed.” [¶] Clara makes many a slip, but covers it up instantly with a brilliant impromptu addition which saves the situation. Some of her feats in this kind are astonishing for swiftness and competency of invention. corroboration. Jean put in cleverly during the terrible days in York: [¶] “Clara is the only person who can tell mamma an improbable lie and get it believed.” [¶] Clara makes many a slip, but covers it up instantly at once with a brilliant impromptu addition which saves the situation. Some of her feats in this kind are astonishing for swiftness and competency of invention. corroboration. Clara’s talents are worked plenty hard enough without this new call upon them—Jean. Of course we do not want Jean to know her own danger, her own danger, that she is in danger that she is in her own danger, her own danger, and that the doctor is spending his nights thirty thirty 30 thirty feet from her. Yesterday at sunrise Clara carried an order from him to Jean’s nurse; and being worn and not at her brightest self, she delivered it in Jean’s hearing. At once Jean spoke up: “What is the doctor doing here—is mamma worse?” It brought Clara to herself, and she said— “No. He telephoned telephoned telegraphed telegraphphoned telephoned this order late last night, and said let it go into effect at six or seven six or seven 6 or 7 six or seven this morning.” This morning Clara forgot herself again. She was in a long hall that leads past Jean’s room, and called out to Katy about something, “Take Take take Take it to the doctor’s room!” Then she flew to explain to Jean with an explanatory lie, and was happy to find that Jean was asleep and hadn’t heard. I wish Clara were not so hard driven—so that she could take a pen and put upon paper all the details of one of her afternoons in her mother’s room. Day before yesterday (Monday), for instance. We were all desperately frightened and anxious about Jean (both lungs affected, temperature 104 2/5, with high pulse and blazing fever), fever), fever) the whole household moving aimlessly about with absent and vacant faces—and Clara sitting miserable at heart but outwardly smiling, and telling her happy mother what good times Jean was having, coasting and carrying on out in the snow with the Dodges these splendid winter days! * * * * days! * * * * [¶] Consider it. Jean was taken the evening of Dec. 22d. Ever since then Clara has had to give her mother a detailed account of Jean’s day, every afternoon; and keep Jean out of doors the most of the time; and tell how fresh she is looking; and how she doesn’t show fatigue; and dresses warmly; and is obediently careful and doesn’t get over-heated—and a lot more. And then Livy goes into bursts of wonder and admiration over Clara’s faithful guardianship of Jean, and especially her marvelous in tact in beguiling that wilful child to do the sane and right thing. “It is perfectly wonderful, Clara, how do you do it, you gifted little thing!” and goes on and deluges ◇◇◇◇ Clara poor Clara with undeserved praises that boil her down and disintegrate her and wash her away till there is nothing left of her but a small wad of contrition and shame. And she’s always trembling, on the inside, lest her mother flash out on her and say— [¶] “Why, Clara, you told me it was Christmas she went to the dance, now you say it was Christmas-Eve.” [¶] Clara’s invention is on the rack all the time, and in various ways. A day or two ago she had to give Mark Hamburg a headache which he hadn’t had. Her mother thought it so inhospitable not to ask him to play on the piano, and was distressed about it. [The piano is right close to Jean’s room.] On Sunday she inadvertently tallied only 3 at the lunch-table: herself, John Howells, and me. [¶] “Where was Jean?” [¶] “Well—strictly speaking, she doesn’t count. She was in one of her thinking moods, and didn’t say a word.” [¶] On Monday—without stirring from the house—Clara did these various things: She received from her mother a list of shoppings to do in New York; put on company dress (for a lunch party); carried loving messages to the hostess (Mrs. Hapgood); went to New York; took the car to her music lesson; took a cab thence to Mrs. Hapgood’s because it was wetting and snowing; returned in a cab after the luncheon; was to be home in time for her watch (3.30); was home on time, and appeared in the sick-room in a wrapper with the shopping-purchases in her hands (she had sent Miss Lyon to New York for them); and sat down and told her mother all the conversation of the lunch-table; and when required to furnish the menu, did it (a thing Livy always requires)—woul —and slipped up on one little detail: little-neck clams, or some other thing that was out of season—I think it was clams. Livy inquired sharply into that, and Clara furnished a properer dish at the same price. I wish I was the father of a hundred liars like Clara. the entire passage is deleted, and bears the following internal revisions: days!* * * * [¶] Consider . . . taken sick . . . 22nd . . . overheated . . . of her marvelous tact . . . perfectly . . . poor Clara . . . The . . . close . . . room. . . . three . . . * * * * On Monday . . . She . . . sick-room with . . . sick-room with . . . always . . . like Clara. SLC initially circled ‘On Sunday . . . a word.’ to leave it standing; then deleted it days! . . . . Joe, Livy is the happiest person you ever saw. And she has had it all to herself for a whole week. What a week! So full of comedy and pathos and tragedy! Jean had a good night last night, and she is doing as well as in the circumstances can be expected. Joe, don’t let those people invite me—I couldn’t go. I have canceled all engagements, and shan’t accept another for a year. There’ll be a full report of that dinnerMy sixty-seventh birthday. M.T. dinner* footnote: *My sixty-seventh birthday. M.T. dinner dinner* footnote: *My 67th birthday. M.T. dinner* footnote: *My 67th birthday. M.T. —issued by Colonel Colonel Col. Harvey as a remembrancer—and of course he will send it to all the guests. If he should overlook you—which he won’t—let me know. Soon [¶] Soon double rule [¶] The episode detailed in my Xmas story happened in our York cottage 3 years ago; it was told me there by Howells, ver on our verandah; and I wrote it up while Livy lay prostrate in the room where that mother died—happy in the belief that her daughter was well, and not suspecting that she had been buried from the house a few days before. [¶] With great love to all of you Mark. Soon [¶] The episode . . . Christmas . . . three . . . there . . . on . . . Mark. ¶ Soon [¶] Soon my brief visit is due. I’ve just been up, listening at Livy’s door. For the first time in months I heard her break into one of her girlish old-time laughs. With a word I could freeze the blood in her veins! veins! veins. veins.! period mended to an exclamation point veins! P.S. 1902. Dec. 31, 4 4 4 5 p.m. A great disappointment. I was sitting outside Livy’s door, waiting. Clara came out a minute ago and said Livy is not so well, and the nurse can’t let me see her to-day. And Clara whispered other things. In the effort to find a new diversion diversion diversion fictitious diversion diversion for Jean, she pretended she had pretended she had not in pretended she had pretended she had sent her down to a matinée in New York this afternoon. matinée in New York this afternoon. matinèe. this afternoon. matinée in New York this afternoon. accent added by Hobby, insertion by SLC matinée in New York this afternoon. accent added Livy was pleased, but at once wanted the name of the play. Clara was aground. aground. balled up. balled up. aground. aground. She was afraid to name one—in fact couldn’t for the moment think of any any any any originally ‘any’; underscore canceled any name. Hesitances won’t do; so she said Jean Jean she didn’t know what Jean Jean hadn’t mentioned the name of it, but was only full of seeing Fay Davis again. That was satisfactory, and the incident was closed. Then— “Your father is willing to go with you and Jean to-morrow night?” (To Carnegie Hall.) (To Carnegie Hall.) (To Carnegie Hall.) (To Carnegie Hall). “Oh, yes. He is reformed since you are sick; never grumbles about anything he thinks you would like him to do. He’s all alacrity to do the most disagreeable things. You wouldn’t recognize him, now. He’s spoiling himself—getting so vain of himself he—” And so on and so on so on and so on so-on and so-on so on and so on —fighting for time—time to think up material. She had sent back the tickets a week ago, with a note explaining why we couldn’t come; the thing had passed out of her mind, and to have it sprung upon her out of the hoary past in this sudden way was a perilous matter and called for wariness. (It is my little juvenile piece “The Death-Wafer,” which Livy loves; and longs to hear about it from an eye-witness.) eye-witness.) eye-witness.) eye-witness). “Who else is going?” “Mary Foote and—and Miss Lyon and—and Elizabeth Dodge—and—I think that is all.” “Why—has Jean invited Elizabeth and not her sister?” sister?” sister?” (Clara (Clara (Clara “(Clara (Clara had forgotten there was a sister, and was obliged to explain that she didn’t really remember, but believed Jean had had had had mentioned the sister.) sister.) sister). “Well, to make sure, speak to her about it. But is that all she has invited? It is a great big box, and the management have been very kind. It mustn’t have a thin look.” And so Livy began to worry. “Oh, don’t you bother, Mousie. You can depend on Jean to have it full. She mentioned names, names, th names names, names, but I had the cook on my hands and wasn’t paying attention.” And at this point, sure enough, I fell heir to my share; for Clara said— “Day after to-morrow she’ll want to know all about it. I can’t furnish details, they’ve gone out of my head. You must post me thoroughly, to-morrow.” She had to get back to Livy’s room, then—and perhaps explain what kept her so long. This is a perplexing place. Livy knows the story, and I don’t. I wrote it three three 3 three years ago, or more. I think I will suggest some such procedure as this—to Clara: “Generalize—keep generalizing—about the scenery, and the costumes, and how bluff and fine the old Lord Protector was, and how pretty and innocently audacious the child was, and how pathetically bowed and broken the poor parents were, and all that, and how perfectly natural and accurate the Tower of London looked—work the Tower hard, Livy knows the Tower well—work it for all it’s worth worth workth worth —keep whirling it in—every time you get stuck, say ‘Oh ‘Oh “Oh , but the Tower! ah, the Tower!’ Tower!’ Tower!” And keep your ears open—your mother will furnish the details, without knowing it. She’ll mention the child’s climbing up into Cromwell’s lap uninvited—and you must break into the middle of her sentence and say ‘Oh ‘Oh “Oh , you should have seen it!’ it!’ it!” and she’ll say, ‘When ‘When “When the child put the red wafer into her own father’s hand—’ hand—’ hand—” you will break in and say, ‘Oh ‘Oh “Oh , Mousie, it was too pitiful for anything—you could hear the whole house sob;’ sob;’ sob;” and she’ll say, ‘Was ‘Was “Was the child equal to her part when she flew to Cromwell and dragged him out and stamped her foot and—’ and—’ and—” you must break in and say ‘It ‘It “It was great! and when he said “Obey! she spoke by my voice; the prisoner is pardoned—set him free! she . . . free! she . . . free! she . . . free! ‘she . . . free!’ underscored she . . . free! ” you you you You ought to have been been been been there! it was just grand!’ ”June, 1906. Clara followed the instructions, and succeeded. grand!’ ”* footnote: *June, 1906 . . . succeeded. grand!” grand!”* footnote: *June, 1906 . . . succeeded. grand!”* footnote: *June, 1906 . . . succeeded. Mark. 1903. Jan. 1/03. The doctor did not stay last night. Just as I was beginning to dress for dinner Livy’s nurse came for me, and I saw the patient four four 4 four minutes. She was in great spirits—like twenty-five twenty-five 25 twenty-five years ago. She has sent me a New-Year greeting this morning, and has had a good night. Jean has had a good night, and does not look to me so blasted and blighted as on the previous days. She sleeps all the time. Temperature down to within a shade of normal, this morning. Everything looking well here (unberufen!) here (unberufen!) here (unberufen!) here. Mark. Jan. 28. Livy [¶] Livy [¶] P.S. Livy no ¶ P.S. Livy [¶] Livy had a slight backset yesterday, so the doctor has just told me he is going to shut off my daily visit visit visit visits visit for a few days. days. days and then reduce it to 8 or 10 minues a day. days. and then reduce it to eight or ten minutes a day. days. It will distress her, and may have an ill effect at first; first; first, first,; comma mended to a semicolon first; but later, later, later later, later, results will show the wisdom of it no doubt. Katy’s absence at Old Point Comfort at Old Point Comfort not in at Old Point Comfort at Old Point Comfort with Jean makes a new difficulty: difficulty: difficulty: difficulty. Livy charges Clara with orders for Katy every day. For months Katy has prepared special dishes for Livy, and now Livy wants her stirred up—she is growing careless in her cooking the past few days and isn’t up to standard! By gracious we can’t counterfeit Katy’s cookery! Yours ever, Yours ever, Ys ever Yours ever, Mark. Jean is enjoying herself very well at Old Point Comfort. Clara has asked Judy to come up, and we are hoping she will say yes. yes. yes. yes. followed by a passage that SLC revised and then deleted: centered: Mr. Howells’s Story. [¶] Howells’s story was to this effect: (I cannot furnish his language, nor can I furnish a particular report of it, but only a sketchy outline.) It was a very pretty house, charmingly situated on his ground above the river. It was built by a Furness of the happened in a Cambridge house occupied by a Furness family, of the Shakespearian Furnesses of Philadelphia. By and by the mother and the grown daughter fell ill at the same time; their bedrooms were separated by the length of the hall; both patients were seriously ill; neither patient was suffered to learn that the other was sick. A system of benevolent protective lying was instituted by the physicians and carried on by themselves, and help of the nurses subordinately, and by a profoundly religious old-maiden relative who had never told a lie in her life before. This tragic comedy continued during a fortnight, or longer, and was successfully played to the end. [¶] The mother and the daughter died on the same day—each in the belief that the other was well—and both funerals took place at the same time. [¶] There were a great many details in the story as told by Mr. Howells. I will not attempt to put them in here, since I have already used them—or at least many of them—in a story which I began to write as soon as Howells left me—a story which I will now insert in this place. [¶] While I was writing this little story called “Was it Heaven? or Was It Hell?” the Fates were preparing to repeat its keystone feature—the benevolent lying—in my own family. In the same room where that mother had died, my wife was to lie stricken. Within a few days, and there again, the sinless lying was to repeat its kindly work. The room was over our heads, and tThere sat Howells unconsciously prophesying, and I listening unafraid. several lines of extra space [¶] (Here insert “Was It Heaven or Was It Hell?”) yes. The story (“Was it Heaven—or Hell?”) (“Was it Heaven—or Hell?”) (“Was it Heaven—or Hell?”) (“Was it Heaven—or Hell?”) appeared in the Christmas Harper Harper Harper five months later, at a time Harper when Jean’s life was hanging by a thread (as we all knew), thread (as we all knew), thread— (as we all knew),— thread (as we all knew) but while she was taking joyous and active part in the Christmas fêtes fêtes feêtes circumflex added and festivities of the neighborhood (as her mother supposed). neighborhood (as her mother supposed). neighborhood— (as her mother supposed.) neighborhood (as her mother supposed.) The mother inquired into all the festivities with that lively interest which was so characteristic of her. She wanted all the details. She wanted all the names. If it was a young people’s party, or fête fête feête circumflex added , or dance, she wanted to know. If it was at William E. Dodge’s house, or if it was at Cleveland Dodge’s, or if it was at George W. Perkins’s house, she had to have the house, the nature of the entertainment, the names of the participants, and all about it. Clara furnished these particulars; and while her mother’s face beamed with pleasure in the thought of the brave time Jean was having, Clara sat there with her still heart listening—if a heart can listen. She knew that Jean might be dying at that moment. Italy. Toward the end of October we carried Mrs. Clemens aboard ship, her excellent nurse, Miss Sherry, accompanying us. We reached Florence on the 9th of November. We conveyed our patient to that odious Villa di Quarto. I have already told a sufficiency of the history of our eight months’ occupancy of that infamous place. I will not inflict upon myself the useless pain of filling out the remaining months of it. Mrs. Clemens was doomed from the beginning, but she never suspected it—we never suspected it. She had been ill many times in her life, but her miraculous recuperative powers always brought her out of these perils safely. We were full of fears and anxieties and solicitudes all the time, but I do not think we ever really lost hope. At least, not until the last two or three weeks. It was not like her to lose hope. We never expected her to lose it—and so at last when she looked me pathetically in the eyes and said “You believe I shall get well?” it was a form which she had never used before, and it was a betrayal. Her hope was perishing, and I recognized it. During five months I had been trying to find another and satisfactory villa, in the belief that if we could get Mrs. Clemens away from the Villa di Quarto and its fiendish associations, the happier conditions would improve both the health of her spirit and that of her body. I found many villas that had every desired feature save one or two, but the lacking one or two were always essentials—features necessary to the well-being of the invalid. But at last, on Saturday the 4th of June, I heard of a villa which promised to meet all the requirements. Sunday afternoon Jean and I drove to it, examined it, and came home satisfied—more than satisfied, delighted. The purchase price was thirty thousand dollars cash, and we could have possession at once. We got back home back home back home back at five in the afternoon, and I waited until seven with my news. I was allowed to have fifteen minutes in the sick-room sick-room sick room two or three times a day—the last of these occasions being seven in the evening—and I was also privileged to step in for a single moment at nine in the evening and say good night good night good-night . At seven that evening I was at the bedside. I described the villa, exhibited its plans, and said we would buy it to-morrow to-morrow tomorrow to-morrow if she were willing, and move her to it as soon as she could bear the journey. She was pleased. She was satisfied. And her face—snow white, marble white, these latter weeks—was radiant. I overstayed my time fifteen minutes—a strenuously forbidden trespass. As I was passing out at the door which was furthest from her bed, furthest from her bed, most distant, furthest from her bed, furthest from her bed, it was borne in upon her that, by rights, I had forfeited my privilege of coming at nine to say good night good night good-night . I think so, so, so, so, because she kissed her hand at me and said “You’ll come again?” I said “Yes.” I came again at nine. As I entered I saw Katy and the trained nurse, one on each side of Mrs. Clemens, who was sitting up in bed—she had not lain down for two months—and they were apparently supporting her. But she was dead. She must have died as I entered the door. She had been blessedly unaware that her end was near. She had been gaily chatting with Katy and the nurse a moment before I entered the room. We brought her home. And in the library of her father’s house, and upon the same spot where she had stood, stood, stood, stood, a young girl bride, thirty-five years before, her coffin now rested. Mr. Twichell, who had assisted at her marriage, was there to say the farewell words.