11 October 1906 Thursday, October 11, 1906 Thursday, October 11, 1906 Thursday, October 11, 1906. Thursday, October 11, 1906. dateline marked to precede ‘It was’ in NAR text; see the entry at 255.13–33 [Thursday, October 11, 1906.] placed before ‘It was’ From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography of Me. ‘From Susy’s Biography of Me.’ underscored From Susy’s Biography of Me. [1885–6.] From Susy’s Biography of Me [1885–6]. Mamma has given me a very pleasant little newspaper scrap about papa, to copy. I will put it in here. I also will insert it, because it is a part of Susy’s little book, and because it contains compliments for me from James Redpath. Compliments from Redpath were worth having. I saw a rather disparaging rather disparaging rather disparaging rather disparaging paragraph the other day that recalled an incident of the Grant obsequies. I was at the Fifth Avenue Hotel at night, when the large halls were crowded with a mob of American celebrities. As we were looking toward the great staircase I saw James Redpath throw a kiss to a man going up, who turned with a friendly smile and tossed back a similar salutation. “Who is that?” I asked. “That,” said Mr. Redpath, “is the man who made death easy for Gen. Grant.” “Who—Shrady or Douglas?”Physicians. S.L.C. Douglas?”* footnote: *Physicians Douglas?”* footnote: * Physicians asterisks added in pencil on TS1 ribbon, probably by Hobby, and in ink on TS1 carbon by SLC “No” said our friend “it is Mr. Clemens—Mark Twain. If it had not been for him Grant’s death-bed would have been haunted by the fear of poverty for his wife and children. I wish” he added “I could tell all I know about Mark’s noble and knightly generosity. But I learned it it it not in only under the seal of confidence. Mark deliberately allows men who would have driven a hard bargain with Grant to malign him when he could crush them by a simple statement. But I tell you the time will come when, if the newspaper reports of this day are read people will ask why Mark Twain was not given the chief place in the procession. If it . . . procession. If it . . . procession. If it . . . procession. deleted before the entire quoted article was deleted He did more than any living man to make Grant die without dread or regret. Mark is a better man than he is an author and there is no doubt, doubt, doubt, doubt I guess, guess, guess, guess that he is great with his pen.” I recall this remark as I saw Mark sneeringly referred to the other day. I also . . . other day. I also . . . other day. I also . . . other day. [¶] It was a rather strong compliment; I think I will leave it out. It was from James Redpath. [¶] It was a rather strong compliment; I think I will leave it out. It was from James Redpath. note that within the entries through 255.33, the readings of TS1 carbon are not represented as canceled I recall . . . day. I recall . . . day. I recall . . . other day. deleted before the entire quoted article was deleted The chief ingredients of Redpath’s make-up were honesty, sincerity, kindliness, and pluck. He wasn’t afraid. He was one of Ossawatomie Ossawatomie Ossawattiomie Ossawattomie Ossawatomie Brown’s right-hand men in the “bleeding Kansas” “bleeding Kansas” “bleeding Kansas” bleeding Kansas days; he was all through that struggle. He carried his life in his hands, and from one day to another it wasn’t worth the price of a night’s lodging. He had a small body of daring men under him, and they were constantly being hunted by the “jayhawkers,” “jayhawkers,” ”jayhawkers,” ‘jay-hawkers’ marked to close up “jayhawkers,” who were pro-slavery pro-slavery pro-slavery proslavery Missourians, guerrillas, modern free lances—— lances— lances— lances—. lances.