22 May 1908 Dictated May 22, 1908 The Harpers Mr. Clemens’s publishers for four four 4 years—Sales of his books, amount of royalties during these four four 4 years, etc.—Copy of letter from young journalist telling of skipper who wrecks three three 3 ships while reading Mark Twain’s books—Incident recalled by this letter, of Jack Van Nostrand finding only two two 2 books while he traveled in the West—a Bible and “The Innocents Abroad.” The Harpers have now been my publishers four years and a half, and I have been examining the details of their last Annual Statement which was furnished to me last December, at the end of the fourth year. They have done exceedingly well with all the books, although almost all of them are old, not young—many of them being books that range from fifteen to twenty-seven years old, and the oldest reaching back to thirty-five and forty. Old as the books are, the sales have increased each year instead of diminishing, as is the custom. The aggregate of volumes sold in the first year by the Harpers was 90,328; in the second year 104,851; in the third year 133,975; in the fourth year—which was last year—the sale was 160,000 volumes. The aggregate for the four years is 500,000 volumes lacking 11,000. Of the oldest book, “The Innocents Abroad”—now forty years old—the sales aggregated 46,000 copies in the four years; of “Roughing It”—now thirty-eight years old, I think—40,334 were sold; of “Tom Sawyer,” Sawyer,” Sawyer, 41,000. And so on. There is one detail that is especially gratifying to me: the book called “The Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc” has also steadily increased its sales instead of diminishing. The gratification lies in the fact that it is a serious book, and therefore was quite unlikely to meet with favor, since it has always been the way of the world to resent gravity in a humorist. It is a little strange that this should be so, for an absolutely essential part of any real humorist’s native equipment is a deep seriousness and a rather unusually profound sympathy with the sorrows and sufferings of mankind. In one sense that book is a novel; in another and graver sense it is history, and a conscientiously accurate one. This accuracy has been conceded by Andrew Lang, and one may fairly say that from his verdict there is no appeal. During twelve years I devoted much study to the Maid’s career, and steeped myself in her words, her acts, and her personality. In the book I made one or two characters of my own invention do things that never happened, but I never attributed an act to the Maid herself that was not strictly historical, and I never put a sentence in her mouth which she had not uttered. I wrote the book for love, not money, and at first, when it appeared serially in Harper’s Monthly Harper’s Monthly Harper’s Monthly , I concealed the authorship, because my name would have deceived the public into thinking it was a humorous work, and I did not wish to trade upon misplaced confidence. But the imaginary characters which I had introduced into it betrayed me; their acts and sayings were frequently of a humorous sort, and of a sort that too distinctly marked them as my children. When the serial had been running three months in the magazine, letters began to flow in charging me with the authorship, and it was soon evident that further concealment would not be worth while. As I have already said, I wrote the book for love, and was not expecting that it would sell; but to my great gratification my forecast was an error. The book is now fifteen years old, yet it not only sells quite well, considering that it is a serious book from the pen of a humorist, but the sales are steadily increasing. In 1904 it sold 1,726 copies; in 1905, 2,445; in 1906, 5,381; and last year—1907—the sale was 6,574 copies. Yet it is the highest priced book in the collection. The royalties paid me by the Harpers in the four years were as follows: in 1904, $24,939; in 1905, $29,311.92; in 1906, $39,284.33; in 1907, $48,225.98. Aggregate for the four years, $141,761.23. A letter has arrived this morning which brings to my mind an incident of forty years ago. The book called “The Innocents Abroad” is a history of the Quaker City Quaker City Quaker City Excursion of that long past time. Jack Van Nostrand was among the excursionists. He was a charming, good-natured, long-legged New York lad of seventeen, and belonged to our small clique on board the ship—a clique consisting of Dan Slote Slote Sloat , now dead; Moulton, now dead; Davis, now dead; Church, now dead; young Jack, long ago dead; and myself, at the present day still alive. Two years after the completion of the excursion poor Jack was smitten with consumption, and his parents sent him to Colorado in the hope that a life in the open air there might save him—a hope which was disappointed. Meantime “The Innocents Abroad” had been published and distributed about the country. Jack rode two or three hundred miles, horseback, through the cattle ranches of Colorado all alone, and at the end of his trip he wrote back to Dan Slote Slote Sloat and said substantially this: “Tell Clemens I saw no human beings on that long trip but cattle ranchmen, and I fed and slept nowhere but in their mud cabins. Tell him that from the beginning to the end I saw only two books: one was a Bible, the other was ‘The ‘The “The Innocents Abroad.’ Abroad.’ Abroad.” The Bible was in good condition.” The letter referred to as having arrived this morning quite naturally brought that ancient incident to my mind. It is to my secretary, and comes from a young journalist who visited us a year ago on his way from his home in Australia on a zigzag journey to the uttermost parts of the earth. He says, dating from Glasgow: I have a grudge against 21 Fifth Avenue and I want to make it known. In just completing a voyage on the tramp steamer “Charing Cross” from Seville to Glasgow, I have had to endure with a skipper whose library (a life collection) consists of one Bible in Welsh and three of Mark Twain’s books in American. As I am the only shipmate this old Welsh skipper has had who has seen Mark Twain, I suppose my burden was really heavier than those who have gone before. At no time, waking or sleeping, fair weather or foul, was I safe from quotations, which after the second day out became repetitions. Meals I dreaded as an Inquisition. Coffee was never handed except with the remark “Can you see two fathoms in that?” (Pun: two-fathoms, mark twain.) In curiosity I investigated the career of this David Davies, master of the good ship “Charing Cross” out of London, and was not surprised to find that he has wrecked three ships in his day. At each time, when the “accident” happened, he was in his berth studying the humorous shelf of his library. Now I am to take one of two courses and I would be glad of your assistance in deciding. Either, as a preservation measure, in the interest of British shipping, must I commence an agitation for the enactment of a law prohibiting the sale of Mark Twain’s books to master mariners, and compelling the circulating libraries at British seaports to remove his volumes from their shelves, or take this alternative—more profitable but hardly as decent as the one stated already. Why not? Secure an option on the remaining years of this David Davies, Master Mariner, and having secured this option, present him with three or four other volumes by Mark Twain—then find and interview the owners of such ships where the profits are light and the insurance heavy, and, for a consideration, make them acquainted with this David Davies, Master Mariner. Then finally study Loyd’s shipping reports and collect dividends. The only running expenses of the Syndicate (I am assuming that you will take shares) would be the cost of three Mark Twain books for each steamer, say approximately 18 volumes a year. There’s money in it.