5 March 1906 Monday, March 5, 1906 Mrs. Clemens’s warning to Mr. Clemens when he attends the Cleveland reception at White House—Describes the Paris house in which they lived in 1893—Also room in Villa Viviani—Also dining room dining room dining-room in house at Riverdale—Tells how Mr. Clemens was “dusted off dusted off dusted-off ” after the various dinners—and the card system of signals—Letter from Mr. Gilder regarding Mr. Cleveland’s sixty-ninth sixty-ninth 69th birthday—Mason. I was always heedless. I was born heedless; and therefore I was constantly, and quite unconsciously, committing breaches of the minor proprieties proprieties proprieties properrieties , which brought upon me humiliations which ought to have humiliated me but didn’t, because I didn’t know anything had happened. But Livy knew; and so the humiliations fell to her share, poor child, who had not earned them and did not deserve them. She always said I was the most difficult child she had. She was very sensitive about me. It distressed her to see me do heedless things which could bring me under criticism, and so she was always watchful and alert to protect me from the kind of transgressions which I have been speaking of. When I was leaving Hartford for Washington, upon the occasion referred to, she said said said said: “I have written a small warning and put it in a pocket of your dress vest dress vest dress vest dress-vest . When you are dressing to go to the Authors’ Reception at the White House you will naturally put your fingers in your vest pockets, according to your custom, and you will find that little note there. Read it carefully, and do as it tells you. I cannot be with you, and so I I I I delegate my sentry duties to this little note. If I should give you the warning by word of mouth, now, it would pass from your head and be forgotten in a few minutes.” It was President Cleveland’s first term. I had never seen his wife—the young, the beautiful, the good-hearted, the sympathetic, the fascinating. Sure enough, just as I had finished dressing to go to the White House I found that little note, which I had long ago forgotten. It was a grave little note, a serious little note, like its writer, but it made me laugh. Livy’s gentle gravities often produced that effect upon me, where the expert humorist’s best joke would have failed, for I do not laugh easily. When we reached the White House and I was shaking hands with the President, he started to say something but I interrupted him and said, “If said, ¶ “If said no ¶ “If said ¶ “If said: ¶ “If your Excellency will excuse me, I will come back in a moment; but now I have a very important matter to attend to, and it must be attended to at once.” I ¶ I no ¶ I ¶ I turned to Mrs. Cleveland, the young, the beautiful, the fascinating, and gave her my card, on the back of which I had written “He didn’t” “He didn’t” “He didn’t” ‘ “He didn’t” ’ underscored “He didn’t” —and I asked her to sign her name below those words. She said said said said: “He didn’t? He didn’t what?” “Oh,” I said, “never mind. We cannot stop to discuss that now. This is urgent. Won’t you please sign your name?” (I handed her a fountain pen.) fountain pen.) fountain pen). fountain-pen.) “Why,” “Why,” “Why,” “Why,” she said, said, said said, “I cannot commit myself in that way. Who is it that didn’t? didn’t? didn’t? didn’t? —and what is it that he didn’t? didn’t? didn’t? didn’t? ” “Oh,” I said, said, said, said, “time is flying, flying, flying. Won’t you take me out of my distress and sign your name to it? It’s all right. I give you my word it’s all right.” She looked nonplused; nonplused; nonplused, nonplussed,; nonplussed; but hesitatingly and mechanically mechanically mechanically, mechanically, mechanically she took the pen and said, “I said, ¶ “I said no ¶ “I said ¶ “I said: ¶ “I will sign it. I will take the risk. But you must tell me all about it, right afterward, so that you can be arrested before you get out of the house in case there should be anything criminal about this.” Then she signed; and I handed her Mrs. Clemens’s note, which was very brief, very simple, and to the point. It said said said said: “Don’t wear your arctics in the White House.” “Don’t . . . House.” “Don’t . . . House.” ‘ “Don’t . . . House.” ’ underscored “Don’t . . . House.” It made her shout; and at my request she summoned a messenger and we sent that card at once to the mail on its way to Mrs. Clemens in Hartford. 1893–94 1893–94 (1893–4) typed in the margin During 1893 and ’94 we were living in Paris, the first half of the time at the Hotel Brighton, in the rue de Rivoli, the other half in a charming mansion in the rue de l’Université l’Université l’Universite l’Universiteé accent added , on the other side of the Seine, which, by good luck, we had gotten hold of through another another amnother another man’s ill luck. This was Pomeroy, the artist. Illness in his family had made it necessary for him to go to the Riviera. He was paying thirty-six hundred dollars a year for the house, the house, it, the house, the house, but allowed us to have it at twenty-six hundred. It was a lovely house; large, quaint, indefinite, quaint, indefinite, rambling, quaint, rambling, quaint, indefinite, charmingly furnished and decorated; built upon no particular plan; delightfully rambling, uncertain, and full of surprises. You were always getting lost in it, and finding nooks and corners and rooms which you didn’t know were there and whose presence you had not suspected before. It was built by a rich French artist; and he had also furnished it and decorated it with his own hand. with his own hand. himself. himself. with his own hand. The studio was cosiness cosiness coziness itself. We used it as drawing-room, sitting-room, living-room, dancing-room—we used it for everything. We couldn’t get enough of it. It is odd that it should have been so cosy cosy cozy , for it was forty feet long, forty feet high, and thirty feet wide, with a vast fireplace on each side in the middle, and a musicians’ musicians’ musicians’ musicians’ gallery at one end. But we had, before this, found out that under the proper conditions spaciousness and cosiness cosiness coziness do go together most affectionately and congruously. We had found it out a year or two earlier, when we were living in the Villa Viviani three miles outside the walls of Florence. That house had a room in it which was forty feet square and forty forty . . . forty forty-two . . . forty-two SLC wrote in the margin, next to these words, ‘42? or was it 40? See previous somewhere.’; in “Villa di Quarto” he had used the lower figure for the measurements of the room in the Villa Viviani (45.6), and that number is adopted here forty-two . . . forty-two feet high, and at first we couldn’t endure it. We called it the Mammoth Cave; we called it the skating-rink; we called it the Great Sahara; we called it the Great Sahara; we called it the Great Sahara; we called it the Great Sahara; we called it all sorts of names intended to convey our disrespect. We had to pass through it to get from one end of the house to the other, but we passed straight through and did not loiter—and yet before long, and without our knowing how it came about, came about, happened, happened, came about, we found ourselves infesting that vast place day and night, and preferring it to any other part of the house. Four or five years ago, when we took a house on the banks of the Hudson, at Riverdale, we drifted from room to room on our tour of inspection, always with a growing doubt as to whether we wanted that house or not. But at last when we arrived in a dining room dining room dining-room that was sixty feet long, thirty feet wide, and had two great fireplaces fireplaces fire-places in it, that settled it. But I have wandered. What I was proposing to talk about was quite another matter—to wit: in that pleasant Paris house Mrs. Clemens gathered little dinner companies together once or twice a week, and it goes without saying that in these circumstances my defects had a large chance for display. Always, always without fail, as soon as the guests were out of the house, I saw that I had been miscarrying again. Mrs. Clemens explained to me the various things which I had been doing doing doing and doing and which should have been left undone, and she was always able to say, “I say, ¶ “I say no ¶ “I say ¶ “I have told you over and over again, yet you do these same things every time, just as if I never had warned you.” The ¶ The no ¶ The ¶ The children always waited up to have the joy of overhearing this. Nothing charmed them, nothing delighted them, nothing satisfied their souls like seeing me under the torture. the torture. the torture. the torture. discipline. The moment we started up stairs up stairs up-stairs we would we would we’d we’d would hear skurrying skurrying the scurrying of the scurrying of garments, and we we we we knew that those children had been at it again. They had a name for this performance. They called it “dusting-off papa.” They were obedient young rascals as a rule, by habit, by training, by long experience; but they drew the line there. They couldn’t be persuaded to obey the command to stay out of hearing when I was being dusted off dusted off dusted-off dusted off . At last I had an inspiration. It is astonishing that it had not occurred to me earlier. I said, “Why said, ¶ “Why said no ¶ “Why said ¶ “Why Livy, you know that dusting me off after these these these these these dinners is not the wise way. You could dust me off after every dinner for a year and I should always be just as competent to do the forbidden thing at each succeeding dinner as if you had not said a word, because in the meantime I have forgotten all these instructions. I think the correct way is for you to dust me off immediately before the guests arrive, and then I can keep some of it in my head and things will go better.” She recognized that that was wisdom, and that it was a very good idea. Then we set to work to arrange a system of signals to be delivered by her to me during dinner; signals which would indicate definitely which particular crime I was now engaged in, so that I could change to another. Apparently one of the children’s most precious joys had come to an end and passed out of their life. I supposed that that was so, but it wasn’t. The young unteachables unteachables rascals rascals unteachables got a screen arranged so that they could be behind it during the dinner and listen for the signals and entertain themselves with them. The system of signals was very simple, but it was very effective. If Mrs. Clemens happened to be so busy, at any time, talking with her elbow-neighbor, elbow-neighbor, elbow-neighbor elbow-neighbor, that she overlooked something that I was doing, she was sure to get a low-voiced hint from behind that screen in these words: “Blue card, mamma;” mamma;” mamma;” mamma;” or “red card, mamma” mamma” mamma” mamma” —“green card, mamma”—so that I was under double and triple guard. What the mother didn’t notice the children detected for her. As I say, the signals were quite simple, but very effective. At a hint from behind the screen, Livy would look down the table and say, in a voice full of interest, if not of counterfeited apprehension, “What did you do with the blue card that was on the dressing-table—” That was enough. I knew what was happening—that I was talking the lady on my right to death and never paying any attention to the one on my left. The blue card meant “Let the lady on your right have a reprieve; destroy the one on your left;” left;” left;” left;” so I would at once go to talking vigorously to the lady on my left. It wouldn’t be long till there would be another hint, followed by a remark from Mrs. Clemens which had in it an apparently casual reference to a red card, which meant “Oh, are you going to sit there all the evening and never say anything? Do wake up and talk.” So I waked up and drowned the table with talk. We had a number of cards, cards, cards, cards, of different different the different different colors, each meaning a definite thing, each calling attention to some crime or other in my common list; and that system was exceedingly useful. It was entirely successful. It was like Buck Fanshaw’s riot, it riot, it riot. It riot. It : , it period mended to a colon, then altered to a comma broke up the riot before it got a chance to begin. It headed off crime after crime all through the dinner, and I always came out at the end successful, triumphant, with large praises owing to me, and I got them on the spot. It is a far call back over the accumulation of years to that night in the White House when Mrs. Cleveland signed the card. Many things have happened since then. The Cleveland family have been born since then. Ruth, the first-born, whom I never knew, knew, knew, knew, but with whom I corresponded when she was a baby, lived to reach a blooming and lovely young maidenhood, then passed away. To-day comes this letter, and it brings back the Clevelands, and the past, and my lost little correspondent. Editorial Editorial “Editorial Editorial Department The Century Magazine. March 3, 1906. Union Square, New York. My dear Mr. Clemens: President Finley and I are collecting letters to Ex-President Cleveland from his friends, appropriate to his 69th birthday. If the plan appeals to you, will you kindly send a sealed greeting under cover to me at the above address, and I will send it, and the other letters, South to him in time for him to get them, all together, on the 18th of the present month. Yours sincerely, R. W. Gilder. G. Mr. Samuel L. Clemens. Clemens. Clemens.” Clemens. When the little Ruth was about a year year year, year or a year and a half year and a half year-and-a-half year and a half old, Mason, an old 1867–69 1867–69 (1867–69) typed in the margin not in and valued friend of mine, mine, mine, mine, was Consul General Consul General consul-general at Frankfort-on-the-Main. I had known him well in 1867, ’68 and ’69, in America, and I and mine had spent a good deal of time with him and his family in Frankfort in ’78. 1878 1878 not in (’78) typed in the margin not in He was a thoroughly competent, diligent, and conscientious official. Indeed he possessed these qualities in so large a degree that among American American Americal American Consuls Consuls consuls he might fairly be said to be monumental, for at that time our consular service was largely—and I think I may say mainly—in the hands of ignorant, vulgar, and incapable men who had been political heelers in America, and had been taken care of by transference to consulates where they could be supported at the Government’s expense instead of being transferred to the poor house poor house Poor House Ppoor Hhouse, ‘P’ and ‘H’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c./l.c.’ poor house , which would have been cheaper and more patriotic. Mason, in ’78, 1878 1878 not in (’78) typed in the margin had been Consul General Consul General consul-general in Frankfort several years—four, I think. He had come from Marseilles with a great record. He had been Consul Consul consul there during thirteen years, and one part of his record was heroic. There had been a desolating cholera epidemic, and Mason was the only representative of any foreign country who stayed at his post and saw it through. And during that time he not only represented his own country, but he represented all the other countries in Christendom and did their work, and did it well and was praised for it by them by them not in by them by them in words of no uncertain sound. This great record of Mason’s had saved him from official decapitation straight along while Republican Presidents Presidents presidents occupied the chair, but now it was occupied by a Democrat. Mr. Cleveland was not seated in it—he was not yet yet yet yet inaugurated—before he was deluged with applications from Democratic politicians desiring the appointment of a thousand or so politically useful Democrats to Mason’s place. Mason Mason A year or two later Mason A year or two later Mason wrote me and asked me if I couldn’t do something to save him from destruction.