10 September 1906 Monday, September 10, 1906 Plan of this autobiography—Satire on Captain Captain Capt. Sellers—Mr. Clemens published no literature until forty years forty years 40 yrs. ago—Two letters from Mr. Alden and one from Mr. Rees in regard to “Snodgrass” papers—Mr. Clemens’s comments on same. I have not yet finished about the British Premier and his seventieth birthday, but I will let that go over until another day and talk about a matter of immediate interest— interest— interest——no, interest——no, an interest born of Saturday’s mail. As I have several times remarked before, in the course of these dictations, it is the foundation principle of this autobiography that it shall drop a subject, whether it be finished or not, the moment a subject of warmer interest shall intrude itself. I think I have also said that the foundation plan or principle of this autobiography is that no subject shall ever be continued after one of a sharper and fresher interest for me has come clamoring clamoring clattering clattering clamoring into my mind. In fact, this autobiography is substantially a conversation, albeit I do all the conversing myself. In a conversation of two hours’ duration, duration, duration duration, subject after subject is touched upon and upon and upon, upon, and discussed for a few minutes, but but and and but is never completed; completed; completed, completed,; comma mended to a semicolon it it but but it is always dropped in the middle to make way, in turn, for a subject of newer interest which has been suggested by a remark dropped by the talker who for the moment has the floor. The other autobiographies patiently and dutifully follow a planned and undivergent and undivergent and undivergent course through gardens and deserts and interesting cities and dreary solitudes, and when at last at last at last at last at last corrected miswriting they reach their appointed goal they are pretty tired—and they have been frequently tired during the journey, too. But this is not that kind of autobiography autobiography autobiography an autobiography . This one is only a pleasure excursion, and it excursion, and it excursion—, and it excursion —and it sidetracks itself anywhere that there is a circus, circus, show, show, circus, comma transferred by Lyon, revision by SLC or a fresh excitement of any kind, and seldom waits until the show is over, but packs up and goes on again as soon as a fresher one is advertised. In a chapter which I dictated five months ago,I made a little outline-sketch, in which I strung together certain facts of my life and named the dates of their occurrence. I stated that in 1849, in 1849 1849 (1849) Hannibal, Missouri Missouri Mo. , when I was a child of fourteen, my brother went away on a journey, and I edited one issue of his weekly newspaper for him without invitation, and and and that when he got back it took him several weeks to quiet down and pacify the people whom my writings had excited. That was fifty-seven years ago. I did not meddle with a pen again, so far as I can remember, again, so far as I can remember, again, so far as I can remember, again so far as I can remember until ten years later—1859. 1859 1859 (1859) I was a cub pilot on the Mississippi River then, and one day I wrote a rude and crude satire which was leveled at Captain Isaiah Sellers, the oldest steamboat pilot on the Mississippi River, River, River, River and the most respected, esteemed, and revered. For many years he had occasionally written brief paragraphs concerning the river and the changes which it had undergone undergone undergone, under his observation observation observation, during fifty years, and had had he had signed these paragraphs “Mark Twain” and published them in the St. Louis and New Orleans journals. In my satire I made rude game of his reminiscences. It was a shabby shabby shabby, poor performance, but I didn’t know it, and the pilots didn’t know it. The pilots thought it was brilliant. They They They pilots were jealous of Sellers, Sellers, Sellers, Sellers because when the gray-heads gray-heads gray-heads gray heads among them pleased their vanity by detailing in the hearing of the younger craftsmen marvels which they had seen in the long ago ago ago, on the river, Sellers was always likely to step in at the psychological moment and snuff them out with wonders of his own which made their small small small marvels look pale and sick. However, I have told all about this in “Old Times on the Mississippi.” The pilots handed my extravagant satire to a river reporter, and it was published in the New Orleans True Delta. That poor old Captain Sellers was deeply wounded. He had never been held up to ridicule before; he was sensitive, and he never got over the hurt which I had wantonly and stupidly inflicted upon his dignity. I was proud of my performance for a while, and considered it quite wonderful, but I have changed my opinion of it long ago. Sellers never published another paragraph nor ever used his nom de guerre nom de guerre nom de guerre again. Between 1859 and the summer of 1859–62 1859–62 (1859–1862) 1862 I left the pen strictly alone. I then became a newspaper reporter in Nevada, but I wrote no literature. I confined myself to writing up the inconsequential happenings of Virginia City for the Territorial Enterprise. I wrote no literature until 1866, 1866 1866 (1866) when a little sketch of mine called “The Jumping Frog” was published in a perishing literary journal in New York and killed it on the spot. Now then, if I know my own history, I never wrote and never published a line of literature until forty years ago. If I know my own history, I never had any leaning toward literature, nor any desire to meddle with it, nor it, nor it, and nor it and nor had ever ever never SLC overlooked the solecism created by his revision flourished a literary flourished a literary touched a flourished a literary touched a flourished a literary pen save by accident—and then only twice—up to forty years ago. Now then I have arrived at that subject whose fresh new interest has sidetracked my reminiscences of the British Premier and postponed their completion— completion— completion,— for the present— present— present,— while I consider this new and delicious matter furnished by Saturday’s mail. First in order come the following letters, two by Mr. Alden, editor of Harper’s Monthly, and one by a Mr. Thomas Rees: Editorial Rooms, Harper’s Magazine Harper & Brothers Franklin Square, New York September 6, 1906. Dear Mark: I received a few weeks ago from Mr. Thomas Rees some manuscripts offered for sale to us, purporting to be copies of “Snodgrass” papers contributed by you some fifty years ago to a newspaper published by his father. I returned them with a letter of which I send you a copy—also a copy of a letter I have just received from him. I think you should have cognizance of this correspondence. The offer of the manuscripts was accompanied by an affidavit sworn to by Mr. Rees, Sr., attesting to your authorship. Yours faithfully, H. M. Alden H. M. Alden H. M. Alden Samuel L. Clemens, Esq., Dublin, New Hampshire. (Signed) H. M. Alden. Samuel L. Clemens, Esq., Dublin, New Hampshire. COPY of Mr. Alden’s letter to Mr. Thomas Rees. August 27, 1906. Dear Mr. Rees: We cannot publish the “Snodgrass” letters you send us, as they have no interest to our readers as the productions of “Snodgrass,” and we could not put them forth as the productions of “Mark Twain” because that would be untrue. Even the suggestion that “Snodgrass” died and was buried and arose again as “Mark Twain” would be a distinct injury to Mr. Clemens, after he had so utterly and deliberately discarded the earlier pen-name. It certainly would be a manifest impropriety. In any case I venture to suggest that Mr. Clemens should be consulted before any attempt is made to publish these things. Very truly yours, (Signed) H. M. Alden. Mr. Thomas Rees, Illinois State Register, Springfield, Illinois. COPY of Mr. Thomas Thomas Rhomas Rees’s letter, manager manager Manager of the Illinois State Register. Register. Register, Springfield, Ill., Sept. 4, 1906. H. M. Alden, C/o Harper Bros., Pubs., New York City. Dear Sir: I acknowledge hereby the receipt of the manuscripts of the Clemens “Snodgrass” articles. Please accept my thanks for their prompt return. I notice you advise at the close of your letter reading, “In any case I venture to suggest that Mr. Clemens should be consulted before any attempt is made to publish these things.” While as a matter of courtesy, in case I should conclude to publish the same, I might communicate with Mr. Clemens, I do not know that he has any rights in the premises, nor that there is anything in the ethics of the situation that call for a compliance with your advice. Mr. Clemens wrote these articles under contract with my father and my elder brother more than half a century ago. He was paid for the same and thereby parted entirely with any right that he might have had in them at that time. They were published in a daily newspaper without being copyrighted, and thereby became public property. The only rights that I have in the premises that are not possessed by the general public, is the fact that I know where to find the text and have an affidavit of their genuineness. If I should lay the matter of the publication of these articles before Mr. Clemens and he should request or forbid that I should publish the same, it would in no way protect him against the other eighty million people in the United States that might be disposed to take up the work. And no history of Mr. Clemens’s life will be complete without at least reference to these particular articles and his former pen name. However, I am under lasting obligations for your kind advice. Yours respectfully, (Signed) Thomas Rees. To me this is a most interesting thing, because it is such a naïve naïve naiïve dieresis added naive exposure of certain traits in human nature—traits which are in everybody, no doubt, but which only about about about one man in fifty millions is willing to lay bare to the public view. The rest of the fifty millions are restrained by pride from making the exposure. Did I write the rubbish with which Mr. Rees charges me? I suppose not. I have no reason to suppose that I wrote it, but I can’t say, and and and I don’t say, that I didn’t write it. I can only say that since by Mr. Rees’s count I was only eighteen or nineteen years old at the time, it must have been a colossal event in my life, and one likely to be remembered by me for a century. life, and one likely to be remembered by me for a century. life., and one likely to be remembered by me for a century. I am astonished that it has left no impression, nor any sign of an impression, upon my memory. If a Far-Western Far-Western Hannibal Far-Western lad of eighteen or nineteen had, all by himself and in his own name, entered into a solemn contract entered into a solemn contract entered into a solemn contract ‘entered into a solemn contract’ underscored —a contract to do or suffer anything, little or big—he would have put aside all other concerns, temporal and eternal, and made a house-to-house house-to-house house-to-house house to house visitation throughout the village and told everybody, even to the cats and dogs, about it, and it would have made him celebrated. Celebrity is what a boy or a youth longs for more than for any other thing. He would be a clown in a circus; he would be a pirate, he would sell himself to Satan, he would sell himself to Satan, he would sell himself to Satan, he would sell himself to Satan in order to attract attention and be talked about and envied. True, it True, it True, It True, Ii ‘I’ marked for lowercase with a slash is the same with every grown-up person; person; person.; period mended to a semicolon person. I am not meaning to confine this trait to the boys. But there is a distinction between the boy and the grown person—the boys are all Reeses. That is to say, they That is to say, they That is to say, Tthey lack caution; they lack wisdom; they are innocent; they are frank; and when they have an opportunity to expose traits which they ought to hide they don’t know enough to resist. Up to the time that I was eighteen or nineteen years old, no Far-Western Far-Western Hannibal Far-Western boy of that age had ever achieved the glory of making a contract making a contract making a contract ‘making a contract’ underscored about something or other and signing it. If I did it I was the only one. I hope I did it, because I would like to know, even at seventy-one, seventy-one, seventy,-one, seventy,one, that I was not commonplace even when I was a child—that I was not only not commonplace, but was the only lad in the Far West the Far West Hannibal the Far West the Far-West that wasn’t. I cannot understand why it is that if I did it, it has left no impression upon my memory. Every boy and girl in the town town village town would have pointed me out, daily, and said with envy and admiration and malice: “There he goes! goes! goes.! period mended to an exclamation point That’s the boy that made a contract made a contract made a contract ‘made a contract’ underscored .” I would have hunted up stragglers, and couples, and couples, and couples, and couples and groups and gangs and gangs and gangs of boys and girls, every day, in order to pass them by with studied modesty and unconsciousness, and hear them say: “He’s the one! He made the contract made the contract made the contract ‘made the contract’ underscored !” Those happy experiences would have made a record upon my memory, I suppose. Indeed I almost know that they would have done it. At a very much earlier age than that, that, that, that I was made the recipient of a considerably smaller distinction by Mrs. Horr, my school-teacher, and I have never forgotten it for a moment since, nor ceased to be vain of it. it. it. and proud of it. I was only five years old, and had been under her ministrations only six months when she, inspired by something which she honestly took to be prophecy, exclaimed in the hearing of several persons that I would one day be “President of the United States, and would stand in the presence of kings unabashed.” “President . . . unabashed.” “President . . . unabashed.” ‘ “President . . . unabashed.” ’ underscored I carried that around personally, from house to house, and was surprised and hurt to find how few people there were, in that day, who had a proper reverence for prophecy, prophecy, prophecy, prophecy and confidence in it. But no matter—the circumstance bedded itself in my memory for good and all. Therefore I cannot see how that much larger thing, that actual thing, that visible and palpable thing—a contract contract contract ‘contract’ underscored , an imposing and majestic contract contract contract ‘contract’ underscored —could have entered into my life at the maturer age of eighteen or nineteen and then flitted away forever and left no sign that it had ever been there. When I examine the next detail I am surprised again. According to the affidavit of what is left, at this distant day, of the elder Mr. Rees, the contract required him to pay pay pay ‘pay’ underscored me for my infant literature; also that I received the payment received the payment received the payment ‘received the payment’ underscored . These things are unthinkable. In that day there was no man in the United States, sane or insane, who could have dreamed of such a thing as wanting an unknown unknown unknown village lad who had never written a line of literature in his life to furnish him some literature; literature; literature,; comma mended to a semicolon literature, and not only furnish him some literature but ask him to take pay pay pay ‘pay’ underscored for it! It is true that in that ancient day everybody wrote ostensible ostensible ostensible literature. There were no exceptions then, there are none now. Everybody wrote for the local paper, paper, paper, paper and was glad to get in gratis—publication was sufficient pay. There were a few persons in America—fifteen perhaps, maybe maybe may be twenty-five—who were so widely known as writers that they could demand remuneration remuneration pay remuneration of the periodicals for their output and get it, but there were no Clemenses in that clan; there were no juveniles in it; no unknown lads lost in the remotenesses of the wild and woolly West who could ask for pay for their untrained scribblings and get it. In 1853, which is 1853 1853 (1853) “more than fifty years ago,” my brother was hit a staggering blow by a new idea—an idea that had never been thought of in the West by any person before— before— before,— the idea of hiring a literary celebrity to write an original story for his Hannibal newspaper for pay for pay for pay ‘for pay’ underscored ! He wrote East and felt of the literary market, but he met with only sorrows and discouragements. He was obliged to keep within the limit of his purse, and that limit was narrowly circumscribed. What he wanted was an original story which could be continued through three issues of his weekly paper and cover a few few couple, of few couple of few columns of solid bourgeois each time. He offered a sum to all the American literary celebrities of that day, in turn, but, in turn, Emerson, Lowell, Holmes, and all the others declined. At last a celebrity of about the third degree took him up— up— up,— with a condition. This was a Philadelphian, Homer C. Wilbur, a regular and acceptable contributor to Sartain’s Magazine Sartain’s Magazine Sartain’s mMagazine and the other first-class periodicals. He said he could not write an original story for the sum offered—which was five dollars which was five dollars which was five dollars ‘which was five dollars’ underscored —but would translate one from the French for that sum. My brother took him up, and sent the money—I don’t remember now where he got it. The story came. We made an immense noise over it. We bragged in double-great-primer double-great-primer canon double-great-primer capitals, readable at thirty yards without glasses, that we had bought it and paid paid paid ‘paid’ underscored for it—proudly it—proudly it,—proudly naming the sum— sum— sum,— and we ran it through four numbers of the paper, increasing the subscription list by thirty-eight thirty-eight fifty-thirty-eight copies, payable in turnips and cord-wood; cord-wood; cord-wood—; cord-wood— and it took all of three months for the excitement to quiet down. Important as this memorable enterprise was, no contract no contract no contract ‘no contract’ underscored passed between the parties. The whole thing was done by letters—just mere ordinary letters—fourteen or fifteen I suppose; suppose; suppose,; comma mended to a semicolon and each person paid the other person’s postage. It was a fashion of the day. Postage was ten cents, and we didn’t prepay because the letter might never arrive and the money would be wasted. Nothing passed but just letters—mere ordinary letters. My brother trusted the great author, the great author trusted my brother. Signed and sealed contracts contracts contracts ‘contracts’ underscored for periodical literature have never been known in this country, nor heard of in any other, except in the one single instance which we have under consideration this morning. The elder Rees, professional affidaviter, had the monopoly of that novelty. He wouldn’t trust even an obscure child of nineteen in so stately a matter as a bucketful of literary slops, without a contract that would hold that lad and be good for fifty years. According to the professional affidaviter, affidaviter, affidaviter, affidaviter I was paid paid paid ‘paid’ underscored for those writings. If it was money, I wonder what the sum was. I know perfectly well, by the Wilbur case, and by the difference between Wilbur’s fame and my obscurity, it couldn’t have been over thirty cents for the bucketful, and I know also that it must have included the bucket. But if the pay was delivered in the universal currency of the Far Far far West, it couldn’t have been cord-wood, because cord-wood was never hauled in smaller lots than half-cords, and a half-cord would have been worth a dollar and a quarter, and would have covered more literature than even a reckless and improvident Rees would have been willing to enter into a solemn contract for. If it was eggs, I got six dozen; if it was watermelons watermelons water-melons I got three; if it was bar-soap I got five bars; five bars; five; bars; if it was tallow-candles I got thirty; if it was soda-water I got six glasses; if it was ice-cream I got three saucers—and the colic. I have no recollection of ever getting those riches. If I got any of them I know I got them in instalments, and wide apart; apart; apart,; comma mended to a semicolon for in that day any so noble an irruption irruption eirruption of wealth as three plates of cream, all paid down in one single instalment, down in one single instalment, down, in one single instalment, down, in one single instalment would have been an event so electrifying and so exalting exalting exalteding that it would stay caked in my memory stay caked in my memory take me stay caked in my memory three centuries. centuries. centuries. to forget it. The common human trait which the Reeses have laid bare for inspection—and which the rest of the nations of the earth carefully conceal for shame, and pretend that they do not possess it—is the trait which urges a man to sacrifice all his pride, all his delicacy, all his decency, when his eye falls upon an unprotected dollar—a a and the a spectacle which sometimes which sometimes which sometimes takes the manhood out of him and leaves behind it nothing but the animal. Affidavits are nothing to this kind of a person; they come cheap; he would make a hundred a day for thirty cents apiece. This kind of person is gratefully gratefully gratefully ready to dig up a crime or a foolishness that has been condoned and forgotten condoned and forgotten condoned and forgotten ‘forgotten’ and ‘condoned’ numbered and marked for transposition by the merciful for fifty years, if he can get a dollar and a half out of it. It is fatal for his his this kind kind kind of a person to have the luck to trace home to an esteemed and respected white-headed woman a forgotten forgotten forgotten disgrace whereby she tarnished her good name in her girlhood, girlhood, girlhood, and has repented of it for half a century, for he will remorselessly remorselessly remorsely expose it it it at once, if there is half a handful of soiled dollars in it for him. It is out of the breed of Reeses that the world gets its Burkes and Hares. But the But the ButThe But Tthe ‘T’ marked for lowercase with a slash Burkes and Hares are to be pitied, not reviled. They only obey the law of their nature. They did not make their nature; they are not responsible; and no humane person will permit himself to say harsh harsh harsh and offensive things about them. It would be impossible for me to say abusive things about these modern Burkes and Hares of the Middle Middle mMiddle West. They must must have to must have bread to eat, and eat, and eat—, and eat— and their ways of acquiring it are limited. As is natural, they acquire it in those ways which give them the most pleasure, the most satisfaction, the most contentment. They dig up dead reputations and sell the rotten product for food, and eat the food. Their ancestors, Burke and Hare, dug up the dead in the cemeteries and cemeteries and cemeteries, and sold the corpses for bread and ate the bread; bread; bread,; comma mended to a semicolon bread, which is another way of saying they fed upon the dead. The Reeses are only Burkes and Hares deprived of their natural trade by the obstructive modern legal conditions under which they exist. I may have written those papers, but it is not at all likely that I did. In any case, I have no recollection of it, and must let it stand at that. But one thing I will will do know and will quite confidently maintain, in spite of all the affidavits of all the Burkes and Hares, and that is that when the affidaviter says that there was a contract contract contract ‘contract’ underscored , and that I was paid paid paid ‘paid’ underscored for the work, those two statements are plain straightforward falsehoods; and what is more, and worse, they are poorly devised, unplausible, and inartistic. As works of art, even As works of art, even As works of art, Even As works of art, Eeven ‘E’ marked for lowercase with a slash a Rees ought to be ashamed of them, I think.