18 June 1906 Monday, June 18, 1906 The five letters written by three women, twenty-seven years ago, and Mr. Clemens’s comments upon them—Bret Harte again. Let me consider that I have now been dead five hundred years. It is my desire, and indeed my command, that what I am going to say now shall not be permitted to see the light until the edition of a.d. 2400. At that distant date the things which I am about to say will be commonplaces of the time, time, time, time, and barren of offence offence offense , whereas if uttered in our day they could inflict pain upon my friends, my acquaintances, and thousands of strangers whom I have no desire to hurt, and could get me ostracized, besides, and cut off from all human fellowship—and the ostracism is the main thing. I am human, and nothing could persuade me to do any bad deed—or any good one—that would bring that punishment upon me. What I am going to say is not new, except to utterance. I think every person in Christendom of average intelligence has thought the things which I am going to say, many and many a time. He is thoroughly familiar with them, in his secret heart, and would gladly and promptly utter them and publish them if he had been dead five hundred years; but all these thousands and thousands of human beings of above average intelligence are like myself, they have not the courage to come out and tell their deep secret to their neighbor, (who (who (who (who possesses the same secret down in the depths of his heart, also, though he never lets on). also, though he never lets on). also., though he never lets on.) also, though he never lets on.) It is against nature for a person to have the courage to get himself spurned and avoided; avoided; avoided,; comma mended to a semicolon avoided; and these millions, along with me, are keeping the great secret, each one thinking he is the only one that has it, and hoping that the others will not find it out and crucify him. My spirit is a little stirred, but I am trying to keep it from appearing at its full temperature in my words. During five years I have had in my possession a sack of old letters to which I attached no value. They were letters from strangers to each other, in the main, Smiths and Joneses and the like, wholly unknown to the world and to me, persons of not the slightest interest to anybody. anybody. the planet or to me. anybody. anybody. I was never expecting to become industrious enough to overhaul that sack and examine its contents, but now that I am doing this autobiography the joys and the sorrows of everybody, high and low, rich and poor, famous and obscure, are dear to me. I can take their heart affairs into my heart as I never could before. In becoming my own biographer I realize that I have become the biographer of Tom, Dick, and Harry, the voiceless. Harry, the voiceless. Harry., the voiceless. Harry, the voiceless. I recognize that Tom and I are intimates; that be he young or be he old, he has never felt anything that I have not felt; he has never had an emotion that I am a stranger to. Before I got up this morning I brought that ancient bag to the bed, and the first envelope I pulled out was a find. It contained five letters written by three obscure women twenty-seven years ago. They embody a pitiful romance. One of the women is evidently old, and has a good use of language but no education. No. 2 is evidently elderly, and apparently has some education. No. 3 is evidently young, and has had but little schooling, but has a native gift of expression which is very striking. I think it very remarkable and very interesting to see how well you know these three women after you have carefully studied their letters a while a while awhile . I think that the three characters stand out as strongly and distinctly as they would in the book of a trained novelist after he had devoted seventeen pages to painting their portraits for us. The three are strangers to me. I had never heard of them until this morning. The poor little romance is twenty-seven years old, yet the artless art of the ignorant authors of it has made it stir me as if the incidents had happened yesterday; yesterday; yesterday,; comma mended to a semicolon yesterday; and not to strangers, but to personal friends of mine. 1879 Three Rivers Oct 5 1879 Three Rivers Oct 5 1879 Three Rivers Oct 5 Three Rivers X—— Z——, Oct. 5, 1879. revised in blue pencil and ink Mich Mich Mich Mich revised in blue pencil and ink Mrs Williams Williams Clemens Williams Williams G., — — revised in blue pencil and ink Dear Lady Permit a stranger to address a few lines of inquiry to you in regard to Mrs Hunt Hunt Hunt Hunt S. M. S. revised in blue pencil and ink who stoped with you last winter. She was in poor health and was confined at your home—— She is a widdow and has a little boy with her named Earnest Earnest Earnest Earnest. Tommy revised in blue pencil and ink She bcame intimate with a Married man here and got in trouble by him, then suddenly left saying she was going to Kansas City Kansas City Kansas City Kansas City —, revised in blue pencil and ink where she has relatives but instead she went to Detroit Detroit Keokuk Detroit Detroit B—; revised in blue pencil and ink and said she was boarding with Mrs Williams Mrs Williams Mrs Clemens Mrs Williams Mrs. Williams G. revised in blue pencil and ink . Now what I wish to know is this what story did she tell you in regard to herslf and circumstances &c did she have a living child and what did she do with it was it male of female? I will assure you by answering my questions and writing whatever you wish will be kept strictly confidental if you wish it. I think from the tenor of her letters she must have been verry ungrateful for your kindness when she was friendless. I will quote a passage from one of her letters “Mrs Williams Williams Clemens Williams Williams G. revised in blue pencil and ink pretends to be a christian woman but the love for gain is stronger than her religeon and when I could not pay her $50 extra she forgot herself as a lady or a christian and said hard things.” I am a relative of hers but do not wish to screne her in doing wrong, but would like to know how much truth or how many untruths she has told while with you. She pretends she has nothing living, but I have reason to think othewise. By giving this your earliest attention you will confer a great favor on an unknown friend Yours Respecfly Mrs Wm Griffiths Three Rivers Mich Wm Griffiths Three Rivers Mich Wm Griffiths Three Rivers Mich Wm. Griffiths Three Rivers Mich P.M., — — revised in blue pencil and ink From the Same to the Same. From the Same to the Same. not in From the Same to the Same. revised in blue pencil excuse pencil) excuse pencil) written upside down in top margin not in Oct 13th 1879 Three Rivers Mich Oct 13th 1879 Three Rivers Mich Oct 13th 1879 Three Rivers Mich X— Z— Oct. 13th, 1879 Three Rivers, Mich. revised in blue pencil and ink Mrs Williams Williams Clemens Williams Williams G. revised in blue pencil and ink Detroit— Detroit— Keokuk Detroit— Detroit. revised in blue pencil and ink Dear Madam Yours of the 9th was duly recd and many thanks for your kindness and prompt answer— You have failed to answer the most important part of my letter concerning the child— I will ask again will you please answer them— When she left you house did she take the child with her, what did she inted to do with it, was it Male or female what was the name of the man she told you who was the father of it? Those are plain questions and I trust you as a Lady of honer and integrity and will do as you would wish to be done by— Be assured that no trouble will ever come to you in consequence of it— I have good reasons for wishing to know these things as I know all the rest from her own pen. She givs me the name of a man but I have reason to doubt her word. She has told different stories and I dont consider her word good for anything I do not blame you for doing as you did by her but I think your confidence confidence confidenc written off the page confidence was misplaced and she illtreated you for your kindness to her—— I will give you just one illustration— You say she did not board with you—you allso say she went away in your debt I have in my possesion a bill of her own making while at your house saying like this. Indebtedness paid from 24 of Dec to 6th of March—— Commencing (10 weeks board $8. per week $80) &c and other things carried out in the same way untill it figures up to nearly $200—two hundred dollars and to my certain knowledge she had over two hundred from here while at your house, and was abuntently able to have paid all that you required of her——you say she said the last she heard from this man he was in Canada the one that she tells me I dont think he was ever in Canada in his life I am anxious to hear the name she told you to see how they will corispond— If you will be kind enough to answer ths early, you may heare from me again— Resectfly your Friend Mrs Wm Griffiths Wm Griffiths Wm Griffiths Wm. Griffiths. P. M. revised in blue pencil From the Girl to Mrs. Williams. From the Girl to Mrs. Williams. not in From the Girl to Mrs. G. revised in blue pencil Kansas City Kansas City* Kansas City Kansas City G— G—, Missouri,* revised in blue pencil and ink Probably March or April. (M.T.) [¶] *Probably March or April. (M.T.) [Probably March or April. M.T.] revised in brown pencil (footnote) ‘*Probably March or April.* (M.T.) revised in blue pencil to create a footnote My Dear Mrs Williams Williams Clemens Williams Williams G. revised in blue pencil and ink I have been so Ill both in mind and body that I found it impossible to write you before. I arrived in Chicago at 6 am the next morning and as soon as I could went to bed and was not able to leave there untill the last of the next week. I was fearful that I was being taxed beyond my strength to endure and such is the case I am so nervous that I cannot control my hand in writing. My kind friends in C— have done nobly such kindness I did not look for, little Bessie Bessie Bessie Bessie Lizzie revised in blue pencil is well cared for which of course help’s me although, I cannot help longing to have her myself. I have never heard a word from Mr H Mr H Mr H Mr. H S. W. revised in blue pencil and ink since I left your home and cannot learn where he is the most I have learned has been that he was in Canida I presume like the coward and villain that he has proved himself to be he will stay away, if possible I expect to go to Colorado. I am so miserable that I do not have very much ambition. I feel the necessity of trying to battle with this great trouble, and do something and with God’s help I hope I shall succeed, no one but him know’s what I have suffered and do now. Ernest Ernest Ernest Ernest Tommy is well is very much pleased with the West, he has gone to sabbath School. The weather is and has been rather cool for the time of year. I may stay here untill July I cannot decide yet what I had better do. I hope your health has improved with kind regards Mrs S M Hunt S M Hunt S M Hunt S.M. Hunt. S., revised in blue pencil East 17th 17th 17th 17th Poplar revised in blue pencil st Kansas City Mo Kansas City Mo Kansas City Mo — —, Kansas City Mo revised in blue pencil and ink From Mrs. Williams to the Girl. From Mrs. Williams to the Girl. not in From Mrs. G. to the Girl. revised in blue pencil Detroit. Detroit. Keokuk Detroit. Detroit. West R—, revised in blue pencil and ink October 16. 1879 Mrs Sylvia Hunt— Sylvia Hunt— Sylvia Hunt— Sylvia Hunt S. M. S. revised in blue pencil I received your letter from Kansas City Kansas City Kansas City Kansas City G— G—, revised in blue pencil and ink some months ago. Since then have received some letters from Three Rivers Michigan— Three Rivers Michigan— Three Rivers Michigan— Three Rivers X— Z—, Michigan, revised in blue pencil which have somewhat surprised me. It seems you reported there that you boarded with us at $8.00 per week—that as you left I demanded $50.00 and that I professed to be a Christian but my love for money was stronger than my religion Etc. Etc. It would take too long to quote at length. Mrs Hunt Hunt Hunt Hunt S., revised in blue pencil and ink you know the circumstances under which I took you—on your part—and you know very well you paid but a nominal sum for your accommodations while you were well—but nothing like what you aught to have paid concidering the deception you practiced to get to stay until after your confinement. Concerning the hard things I said to you—you know all I said and I know all I said. I promised to keep your secret—and up to this date nothing has gone from me—rather us—for Mr W. C, C, W. W G. revised in blue pencil knew all. We seldom speak of you in any way—but since you have chosen to misrepresent so many things (and you have done it because this person writing could not know any other way than through you,] again I say since you have chosen to mis represent things as you have and had the money to the amount of over two hundred dollars sent you while at our house and since you have chosen to act as you have—I must say I feel under no obligations to keep from answering certain questions that have been asked me. We thought it but proper to give you this notice before I write again (I have answered one letter to Three Rivers, Three Rivers, Three Rivers, Three Rivers, X— Z—, revised in blue pencil but answered no questions in that—now another is before me. Respectfully, &c. Respectfully, &c. Respectfully Respectfully, &c. revised in blue pencil Mrs M. E. Williams M. E. Williams M. E. Clemens Williams M. E. Williams. G. revised in blue pencil and ink From the Girl to Mrs. Williams. From the Girl to Mrs. Williams. not in From the Girl to Mrs. G. revised in blue pencil Oct 18th Kansas City Kansas City Kansas City Kansas City revised in blue pencil Mrs Williams Williams Clemens Williams Williams, G, revised in blue pencil I am so grateful to you for writing to me and giving me an opportunity to defend myself from Parties who seem determined to injure all they can. When I came here I was Heart broken so my Sister said she would never thought I was the same person and I told her all I do not think I could of lived but for her kindness and support, sometime ago I rec’d a letter, stating that letter’s from those I was with at D D K K West R— explaining every thing, demanding also money for indebtedness &c, which I had left unpaid was rec’d and that there was no use to think I was safe as they knew everything. I was dumb with surprize I felt your demand upon me for $50.00 keenly but at the same time I thought you had the impresion that I could get all the money I wanted and as I did not get away when I expected to you might as well have pay for it, and I did not lay up a hard thought. I have many hours sat and thought of my home at that time and thankful to think I was not thrown among those who I could not trust when I rec’d the letter I replyed by writing to my Sister telling her of the Ill treatment rec’d from Mr H H H H W revised in blue pencil &c when it came to my sickness I said like this that it was to sad for me to say anything about I would and must draw a vail over that forever. I felt deeply hurt to think you had as I supposed written to them and although your name was never mentioned in a letter I ever wrote to anyone (Ernest Ernest Ernest Ernest Tommy revised in blue pencil at one time in writing to his Cousin said Mr Williams Williams Clemen’s Williams Williams G revised in blue pencil where we lived had the nicest Black cow he ever saw) and I did not think anything of it as I had not one thought of trying to deceive anyone in regard to my name, place or anything accept Mr H H H H W. revised in blue pencil I was told before I left C— to go to D D K K West R— to never let him know the names of anyone but to do the best could, and make him pay at the rate of $8 00 or $9 00 pr wk for board and send all the bill’s I could so as to get all the money I could from him it is utterly false that I had $200 while at your house I had of my own money $65.00 which I got and Mr H H H H W revised in blue pencil did not send me but $25.00 that I had to use while there. If I had not had that of my own I would of been obliged to of applyed for aid he does not know to day how I ever lived or paid as I found he did not get the 3 last letter’s I wrote with bill statements containing board bill at $8.00 pr wk and other bill’s as large as could be made, in one of those letter’s I said like this which I wrote with a demand for money. I shall not be able to leave here under the circumstances which I expected, meaning I was to late, and urged the necessity of imediate releif for Mrs W W C W W G revised in blue pencil . I never expected to remain at your house and had my mind not been so troubled I should of seen I had made a wrong estimate of time I am sorry I did not show you the letter I wrote to Dr F telling him to have everything ready for my comfort through sickness, and at the same time telling him of your great kindness to me and also his reply trying to cheer me and saying God he knew was with me as so many kind friend’s were with me then my letter telling him of my mistake and sickness. I am sure you would not doubt me then in regard to my staying, those 3 letter’s fell into the hand’s of Mr H’s wife Mr H’s wife Mr H’s wife Mr H W’s wife revised in blue pencil and ink; ‘Mr W’s wife’ underscored in place of his and I found she took them to my sister as there was no name to them to see if it was my writing. She then thought she would find out what they meant, and had my Sister write, as also did she, professing to know all and making me think you had written to her and told all, in replying to my Sister, I said I had felt I was with Christan people but you had made me feel and doubt that there was any at all I felt you had told them and tried to get money that I said I thought your asking me for the $50.00 $50.00 $50.00 $65.00 and them the other that your love for money was the greatest. I never mentioned your name then I said Parties my Sister here has seen all the letter’s I have re’cd and all I write and I can prove all I say to you if you wish when I paid you the $10.00 I knew not what I would do as when I arrived in C— I had only money enough to pay my fare here and 95 cts over and walked to the depot to save that, where I boarded they trusted me and the first work I was able to do I sent the money to pay it and Dr F knew all, and but for their aid, I could not of left there under the painful circumstances I had to, as I had no money, and I have never rec’d one ct since nor had a letter from Mr H H H H W revised in blue pencil since before I was sick all I have now I have to work for what is to come in future may if ever I get it be to late to ever help me any my Sister at home then coppied the 3 letter’s and sent them to my Sister here we then knew we had judged you wrong and I am glad it is so and at the same time sorry I said what I did, although I felt I had good reason then to say it Mrs H H H H W revised in blue pencil did not think it would show the deception she wrote me and found she was obliged to let me alone I have no mean’s to defend myself with and it will be best to say nothing. What they have said in regard to my Character is False and utterly without any foundation—made up lies which I do not feel they would care to be made to prove as Mrs W W C W G revised in blue pencil there can no one prove one thing whereever I have been all these yrs I can prove every hr of time how and who with it was spent but Mr H H H H W revised in blue pencil made an attempt to prove that I was not all right I wish the letter I wrote him about that had fell into his wife’s hand’s she would never made an attempt to do what she seem’s anxious she say’s to my Sister she hated her husbanded she knew he was mean enough to do anything, at the same time she want’s to know all and in order to do so has taken what I wrote to my Sister in reply to what I thought you had written) and then the 3 letter’s from them put the indebtedness for board which I sent as I told you to him in order to get money and wrote to you or got someone to so as to make you feel I had done you an injustice and to get you to tell her all your name they got from E’s letter no other way, had I mean’s I would, go home and settle with them I would and could put Mr H H H H W revised in blue pencil in a place where he would be obliged to work as I have proof’s that would do it my Sister here know’s of thing’s that happened when I was a child that my Father had forbidden her to go with him she is older than me but she never told me although say’s many times has thought what if he should take advantage of my being alone and injure me, as she knew he alway’s professed to be such a friend to me. I wish I knew how I could make him pay me $200 or 3—or—5—my Sister think’s it best for me to keep still and in writing say nothing about it she will go home this winter I think, and I have friend’s there that will not beleive me to be bad as they know me and been with me my life has alway’s been a quiet one and have alway’s worked hard there is in every place as you know gossipper’s and a class of people who feast upon all that tend’s to be low and tell lies and is such a habit with them they think and really beleive what they say. I care not for them, although it is not pleasant as I wrote my Sister I was glad I never for one moment felt unhappy for anything I had done wrong in my conscience was clear my unhapiness was caused from the wrong other’s had done to me. Mrs W W C W W G revised in blue pencil I thank you kindly for writing to me and ask your pardon for doubting you and am willing to trust you now whatevr they write to deceive Yours respectfully respectfully respectful[ly] written off the page respectfully Mrs S M Hunt, Kansas City Mo Hunt, Kansas City Mo Hunt, Kansas City Mo Hunt. S. Kansas City Morevised in blue pencil I did not understand about the hard word’s I do not remember that we had any and I cannot recall anything of the kind it is not strange I my poor head is so presed I feel wild sometimes and I have such a battle with myself as the cry for revenge keep’s a battle in my mind I . . . mind I . . . mind written upside down in the top margin I . . . mind I have an uncompromising detestation of that old cat who writes the first letter. I feel disrespectfully toward that machine-made Christian who writes the second one. I think that in her heart in her heart in her heart in her heart ‘in her heart’ underscored; revised in blue pencil she turned the friendless refugee and the baby into the street in the raw March weather; and so I hold her guilty to the hilt for that uncommitted for that uncommitted of that of for that uncommitted revised in blue pencil and ink inhuman act, and I am sure she would have committed committed committed ‘committed’ underscored committed it it that cruelty that cruelty it if she could have done it without falling under the artificial censure of the community. I call it artificial because I think that perhaps the majority of the community would have secretly approved the act while publicly denouncing it. I think this because it is human nature—wrought upon by established conventions—to privately exult over certain kinds of baseness and ungenerosity while publicly censuring them to keep on the good side of Mrs. Grundy. All my sympathies and my compassion are for the betrayed and abused ignorant and trusting young widow, who was as yet too young to know the human race, and I hope that she and her children are long ago dead—a wish and a prayer which I reserve for the good and the deserving alone. I believe every word she says. I think No. 1 is a scheming old malignant. I have already said what I think of No. 2. I discover neither lies nor furtivenesses in the young woman’s letter, but only straight and open sincerities—except in one or two particulars which I am unwilling to regard as serious possible departures from cast-iron fact. When she says she has always led a quiet life and has worked hard, I believe it. When she says her conscience absolves her, I believe that too. I think she means that she was tempted beyond her strength by a man whom she had known familiarly in her early girlhood, and that by some inborn instinct she realized that she did not create her own nature she . . . nature she . . . nature she . . . nature ‘she . . . nature’ underscored; revised in blue pencil , that she did not create its limitations she . . . limitations she . . . limitations she . . . limitations ‘she . . . limitations’ underscored; revised in blue pencil , and that when those limitations were overpassed she was not strictly responsible for the consequences not strictly responsible for the consequences in no way responsible for the consequences in no way not strictly responsible for the consequences ‘in no way’ and ‘not strictly . . . consequences’ underscored; revised in blue pencil and ink . There are human laws against her conduct, but her conduct transgresses no law of Nature, and the laws of Nature take precedence of all human laws laws . . . laws laws . . . laws laws . . . laws ‘laws . . . laws’ underscored; revised in blue pencil . The purpose of all all all all ‘all’ underscored human laws is one—to defeat the laws of Nature to . . . Nature to . . . Nature to . . . Nature ‘to . . . Nature’ underscored; revised in blue pencil . This is the case among all the nations, both civilized and savage. It is a grotesquerie, but when the human race is not grotesque it is because it is asleep and losing its opportunity. That young woman’s letter exhibits the fact that she has had very little schooling. It is unlikely that she has had much practice with the pen, yet how moving and convincing are her simple phrases, her unstudied eloquence! eloquence! eloquence. eloquence.! Her letter is literature literature literature literature ‘literature’ underscored; revised in blue pencil —good literature—and the most practised practised practiced pen cannot surpass it, it, it, it it, out of the best-trained best-trained best trained best-trained best-trained head. She speaks from the heart; heart; heart, heart,; revised in blue pencil and the heart the heart it it the heart it the heart revised in blue pencil has no use for the artifices of training or education or dramatic invention when it has a tale tale tale of the heart tale of the heart revised in blue pencil to tell. I am forgetting Bret Harte—but let him go until another time. This new interest has superseded him, and by the law of this biography the newest and warmest interest always has the floor, and takes precedence of all other matters. I shall finish with Bret Harte by and by, for I am prejudiced against him and feel that I can talk about him impartially. In some of his characteristics he reminds me of God. I do not mean of any and any and any god or and any god or every god among the two or three millions of gods that our race has been manufacturing since it nearly ceased to be monkeys— monkeys— monkeys— monkeys.— I mean our own God. I do not mean that Mighty One Mighty One mMighty oOne mighty one , that Incomparable One Incomparable One iIncomparable oOne incomparable one that created the universe and flung abroad upon its horizonless ocean of space horizonless ocean of space horizonless ocean of space horizonless its ocean of space; its uncountable hosts of giant suns— suns— suns— suns,— fleets of the desert ether, ether, ether, ether, whose signal lights are so remote that we only catch their latest flash when it has been a myriad of years on its way—I mean the little God God God gGod whom we manufactured manufactured manufactured manufactured out of waste waste the waste the waste human material; material; material; material; whose portrait we accurately painted in a Bible and charged its authorship upon Him; Him; Him; him——; the God God God god who created a universe of such nursery nursery nursery majestic dimensions that there would not be room in it for the orbit of Mars (as it is now known to the infant class in our schools) and put our little globe in the centre centre center of it under the impression that it was the only really important thing in it.