9 January 1906 INTERVAL OF TWO YEARS Now comes the New York dictation, beginning January 9, 1906. January 9, 1906. Jan. 9, 1906 Note for the Instruction of Future Editors and Publishers of This This this Autobiography I shall scatter through this Autobiography newspaper clippings without end. When I do not copy them into the text it means that I do not make them a part of the autobiography—at least not of the earlier editions. I put them in on the theory that if they are not interesting in the earlier editions, a time will come when it may be well enough to insert them for the reason that age is quite likely to make them interesting although in their youth they may lack that quality. January title January Jan. 9, 1906 The more I think of this, the more nearly impossible the project seems. The difficulties of it grow upon me all the time. For instance, the idea of blocking out a consecutive series of events which have happened to me, or which I imagine have happened to me—I can see that that is impossible for me. The only thing possible for me is to talk about the thing that something suggests at the moment—something in the middle of my life, perhaps, or something that happened only a few months ago. The only way is for me to write an autobiography—and then, in your case, if you are going to collect from that mass of incidents a brief biography, why you would have to read the thing through and select certain matter—arrange your notes and then write a biography. That biography would have to be measured by the mass of the autobiography. You would publish this during my life—that is your idea? (Meaning Mr. Paine’s book.) Mr. Paine Mr. Paine A. B. P. said: The time of publication could be determined later. Mr. Clemens. Mr. Clemens. Mr. Clemens: Yes, that is so, and what is your idea as to length? Mr. Paine. Paine. Paine: The autobiography ought not to exceed 100,000 words? If it grew, and was very interesting, then it could run out to 120,000? Mr. Clemens. Mr. Clemens. M. T. I should make it in a general way 80,000 words, with 20,000 privilege. It is my purpose to extend these autobiographical notes to 600,000 words, and possibly more. But that is going to take a long time—a long time. Mr. Paine. These notes that we are making here will be of the greatest assistance to you in writing the autobiography. Mr. Clemens. Mr. Clemens. M. T. My idea is this: that I write an autobiography. When that autobiography is finished—or before it is finished, but no doubt after it is finished—then you take the manuscript manuscript MS. and we can agree on how much of a biography to make, 80 or 100,000 words, and in that way we can manage it. But this is no holiday excursion—it is a journey. So my idea is that I do the autobiography, that I own the manuscript manuscript MS. , and that I pay for it, and that finally, at the proper time, why then you begin to gather from this manuscript manuscript MS. your biography. Mr. Paine. You have a good deal of this early material in readiness. Suppose while you are doing this autobiography you place portions of that, from time to time, in my hands, so that I can begin to prepare my notes and material for the other book. Mr. Clemens. That can be arranged. Supposing that we should talk here for for from one or two hours five days in the week—or several days in the week, as it should happen—how many thousand years is it going to take to put together as much as 600,000 words? Let us proceed on this idea, then, and start it, and see, after a few days, if it is going to work. Now then, let us arrive at the cost of this—say it is to be so many thousand words. You charge in that way, don’t you? (One dollar an hour for dictation, and five cents a hundred words for writing out notes.) We will try this—see whether it is dull or interesting, or whether it will bore us and we will want to commit suicide. I hate to get at it. I hate to begin, but I imagine that if you are here to make suggestions from time to time, we can make it go along, instead of having it drag. January January Jan. 9, 1906. 1906. 1906. 1906 Now let me see, there was something I wanted to talk about—and I supposed it would stay in my head. I know what it is—about the big Bonanza in Nevada. Now . . . Nevada. Now . . . Nevada. bracketed by Paine, then deleted by SLC Now . . . Nevada. I want to read read read read quote Paine bracketed ‘read’ and wrote an alternative word above it, now illegible; SLC revised it to ‘quote’ from the commercial columns of the New York Times New York Times New York Times , of a day or two ago, what practically was the beginning of the great Bonanza in Nevada, and these details seem to me to be correct—that in Nevada, during 1871 1871 1871 19871 , John Mackay and Fair got control of the “Consolidated Virginia Mine” “Consolidated Virginia Mine” Consolidated Virginia Mine for $26,000 $26,000 $26,000. $26,000 ; that in 1873, two years later, its 108,000 shares sold at $45 $45 $45.00 per share; and that it was at that time that Fair made the famous silver ore find of the great Bonanza. Also, according to these statistics, in November ’74 the stock went to 115, and in the following month suddenly suddenly certainly ‘certainly’—a word not appropriate in this context—must be a stenographic or transcription error jumped up to 610, and in the next month—January January Jan. ’75—it reached 700. The shares of the companion mine, mine, mine, mine, the “California,” “California,” California, rose in four months from 37 to 780— 780— 780,— 780— a total property which in 1869 was valued on the Mining Exchange at $40,000, was quoted six years later at $160,000,000 $160,000,000 one hundred and sixty million dollars . I think those dates are correct. That great Bonanza occupies a rather prominent place in my mind for the reason that I knew persons connected with it. For instance, I knew John Mackay very well—that would be in 1862, ’63 and ’64 1862, ’63 and ’64 1862–’63– and ’64 1862–’63 and ’64 , I should say. I don’t remember what he was doing when I came to Virginia in 1862 from starving to death down in the so-called mines of Esmeralda, which consisted in that day merely of silver-bearing quartz— silver-bearing quartz— silver boring—-bearing quartz— silver-bearing quartz— plenty of bearing bearing boearing bearing , and didn’t have much load to carry in the way of silver—and it was a happy thing for me when I was summoned to come up to Virginia City to be local editor of the Virginia City Enterprise during three months, while Mr. William H. Wright should go East, to Iowa, and visit his family whom he hadn’t seen for some years. I took the position of local editor with joy, because there was a salary of forty dollars a week attached to it and I judged judged knew knew judged that that was all of thirty-nine thirty-nine forty forty thirty-nine dollars more than I was worth, and I had always wanted a position which paid in the opposite proportion of value to amount of work. I took that position with pleasure, not with confidence—but I had a difficult job. job. job—a difficult job. job.—a difficult job. I was to furnish one column of leaded nonpareil every day, and as much more as I could get on paper before the paper should go to press at two o’clock in the morning. By and by, in the course of a few months I met John Mackay, with whom I had already been well acquainted for some time. He had established a broker’s office on C street C street C. Street C Street , in a new frame house, and it was rather sumptuous for that day and place, for it had part of a carpet on the floor and two chairs instead of a candle-box. a candle-box. one. a candle-box. ‘one.’ deleted in pencil, probably by Hobby a candle-box. I was envious of Mackay, who had not been in such very smooth circumstances as this before, and I offered to trade places with him—take his business and let him have mine—and he asked me how much mine was worth. I said forty dollars a week. He said “I never swindled anybody in my life, and I don’t want to begin with with on on with you. This business of mine is not worth forty dollars a week. You stay where you are and I will try to get a living out of this.” this.” this.” this.” I left Nevada in 1864 to avoid a term in the penitentiary (in another chapter I shall have to explain that) (in . . . that) (and in another chapter I shall have to explain that) (in another chapter . . . to explain that) for sending a challenge, in pencil Paine suggested replacing ‘to explain’ with ‘explained’; SLC responded by revising to ‘for . . . challenge,’ so that it was was is was was all of ten years, apparently, before John Mackay developed suddenly into the first of the hundred-millionaires hundred-millionaires one hundred-millionaires hundred-millionaires . Apparently his prosperity began in ’71—that discovery was made in ’71. I know how it was made. I remember those details, for they came across the country to me in Hartford. to me in Hartford. from theirs to mine. to me in Hartford. to me in Hartford. There was a tunnel 1,700 1,700 1700 feet long which struck in from ’way ’way way down on the slope of the mountain and passed under some portion of Virginia City, at a great depth. It was striking for a lode which it did not find, and I think the search the search it it the search had been long abandoned. Now Now Now it was Now it was in groping around in that abandoned tunnel abandoned tunnel that tunnel that abandoned tunnel that Mr. Fair (afterwards U.S. Senator and multimillionaire,) Senator and multimillionaire,) Senator Fair, and great multimillionaire, who was at that time a day laborer working with pick and shovel at five dollars a day)—groping around in that abandoned tunnel to see what he could find—no doubt looking for cross lodes and blind veins—he Senator and great multimillionaire,) who was at that time a day laborer working with pick and shovel at five dollars a day)—groping around in that abandoned tunnel to see what he could find—no doubt looking for cross lodes and blind veins—he came across a body of rich ore—so the story ran—and he came and reported his find his find that that his find to John Mackay. They examined this treasure treasure body of rich ore body of rich ore treasure and found that there was a very great deposit deposit body deposit deposit of it. They prospected it in the usual way and proved its magnitude its magnitude that there was a large body of it its magnitude its magnitude , and that it was extremely rich. They thought it was a “chimney” “chimney” “chimney” “chimney” —belonging probably to the “California,” “California,” California, “California,” away away away away up on the mountain-side, which had an abandoned shaft—or possibly the “Virginia” “Virginia” Virginia “Virginia” mine which was not worked then—nobody caring anything about the “Virginia,” “Virginia,” Virginia, an empty mine. These These And these And tThese men determined that this body of ore properly belonged to the “California” “California” California mine and by some trick of nature had been shaken down the mountain-side. They got got determined that, and they got got O’Brien—who was a silver expert in San Francisco—to come in come in act come in come in as capitalist, and they bought up a controlling interest in the abandoned claims, the abandoned claims, that abandoned mine, the abandoned mine, claims, and no doubt got it at that figure—$26,000, $26,000, $26,000., $26,000 —six years later to be worth six years later to be worth and they knew that they had prodigious wealth—for these properties (they put them together) went under the name of the Consolidated Virginia Mine, and were worth in 1869 $40,000. and six years later to be worth six years later to be worth $160,000,000. As I say, I was not there. I had been here in the East, six, seven, or eight years—but friends of mine were interested. John P. Jones, who has lately resigned as U.S. Senator after an uninterrupted term of perhaps thirty years, years, years—John P. Jones was not a senator yet, but years, —John P. Jones was not a senator yet, but was living in San Francisco. He He And he And h He had a great affection for a couple of old friends of mine—Joseph T. Goodman and Denis Denis Dennis McCarthy. They had been proprietors of that paper that I served—the Virginia City Enterprise—and they had enjoyed great prosperity in that position. They were young journeymen journeymen journey-men marked to join up journeymen printers, type-setting in San Francisco in 1858, and they went over the Sierras when the Sierras when the mountains—the Sierras—for the mountains—the Sierras—for when they heard of the discovery of silver in that unknown region of Nevada, to push their fortunes. When they arrived at that miserable little camp, Virginia City, they had no money to push their fortunes with. They had only youth, energy, hope. They found Williams there, (“Stud” Williams was his society name,) (“Stud” . . . name,) (“Stud” . . . name,) (“Stud” . . . name) bracketed by Paine, then deleted by SLC who had started a weekly newspaper, and he had one journeyman, who set up the journeyman, who set up the journeyman’s set of, who set up the journeyman, who set up the paper, and printed it it it it on a hand press with Williams’s Williams’s his own Williams’s Williams’s help and the help of a Chinaman. They Chinaman. They Chinaman—and they Chinaman.—and tThey all slept in one room—cooked and slept and worked, worked, worked, worked, and disseminated intelligence in this paper of theirs. Well, Williams was in debt fourteen dollars. He didn’t see any way to get out of it with his newspaper, and so he sold the paper paper newspaper paper to Denis Denis Dennis McCarthy and Goodman for two hundred dollars, they to assume the debt of fourteen dollars and also also to to also pay the two hundred dollars, two hundred dollars, $200., $200, in this world or the next—there was no definite arrangement arrangement promise promise arrangement about that. But as Virginia City developed new mines were discovered, new mines were discovered, they discovered new mines, they discovered new mines, were discovered, new people began to flock in, and there was talk of a faro bank and a faro bank and a faro bank and a faro bank and a church and all those things that go to make a frontier Christian frontier Christian new frontier Christian frontier Christian city. There city. There city, and there city., and tThere was vast prosperity, prosperity, prosperity there, prosperity, there, and Goodman and Denis Denis Dennis reaped the advantage of it. it. that that. it. Their own own not in own prosperity was so great that they built built had built built a three-story three-story three-storey three-story brick building, which was a wonderful thing for that town, and their business increased so mightily mightily greatly mightily mightily that they would often plant often plant put often plant often plant out eleven columns columns column, columns of new ads per day ads per day adds ads per day on a standing galley and leave them there to sleep and rest and breed income. and leave . . . income. —those adds lying there in the obscurity of a standing galley, no man privileged to see them without paying a great tax. and leave . . . income. and leave . . . income. When any man man one man man objected, after searching the paper in the hope of seeing his his their his his advertisement, they would say “We are doing the best we can.” Now and then the advertisements would appear, but the standing galley was doing its money-coining money-coining not in money-coining work all the time. But after a while Nevada Territory while Nevada Territory time, when that territory time, when that t while Nevada Territory was turned into a State State state , in order to furnish office for some people who needed needed should needed needed office, and by and by the and by and by the their and by and by their paper, from paying paying paying clear to paying those boys twenty to forty thousand dollars a year, ceased ceased had ceased had ceased to pay anything. I suppose they were glad glad very glad very glad to get rid of it—and probably on the old terms— it—and . . . terms— it, and probably on the old terms, it,—and . . . terms,— to some journeyman who was willing to take the old fourteen dollars’ dollars’ dollars indebtedness and pay pay pay for pay it when he could. These boys went down to San Francisco, setting type again. They were delightful fellows, always ready for a good time, and that meant that everybody got their money except themselves. And when the Bonanza was about to be discovered, Joe Joe Joe Joe Goodman arrived here from somewhere that he’d been—I suppose trying to make business, or a livelihood, or something—and he came to see me to borrow three hundred dollars to take him out to San Francisco. And if I remember rightly he had no prospect in front of him at all, but thought he would be more likely to find it out there among the old friends, and he went to San Francisco. He arrived there just in time to meet Jones (afterwards U.S. Senator,) Senator,) Senator,) Senator), who was a delightful man. Jones met him and said privately “There has been a great discovery made in Nevada, and I am on the inside.” Denis Denis Dennis was setting type in one of the offices there. He was married, and was building a wooden house, to cost $1,800, $1,800, $1800., $1800, and he had paid a part and was building it on instalments out of his wages. And Jones said “I am going to put you and Denis Denis Dennis in privately on the big Bonanza. I am on the inside, I will watch it and we will put this money up on a margin. Therefore when I say it is time to sell, it will be very necessary to sell.” So he put up 20 per cent 20 per cent twenty per cent. margins for those two boys—and that is the time when this great spurt must have happened which sent that stock up to the stars to the stars to the stars to the stars in one flight—because, because, because, because, as the history was told to me by Joe Goodman, when that thing happened thing happened stock soared to that vast price, thing happened thing happened Jones said to Goodman and Denis Denis Dennis “Now then, sell. You You Now y You You can come out $600,000 $600,000 $600,000. $600,000 ahead, each of you, and that is enough. Sell Sell Let’s s Sell Sell .” “No,” Joe objected, “It will will would will will go higher.” Jones said, said, would say said, said, “I am on the inside, you are not. Sell.” Joe’s wife implored him to sell, he wouldn’t wouldn’t would n’t wouldn’t do it. Denis’s Denis’s Dennis’s family implored him to sell. Denis Denis Dennis wouldn’t sell. And so it went on during two weeks. Each time the stock made made would makde made a flight Jones tried to tried to would try to tried to tried to get the boys to sell. They wouldn’t do it. They said, said, would say said, said, “It is going higher.” When When TWhen When he said “Sell at $900,000,” they said $900,000,” they said $900,000.,” they said $900,000,” they said “No, No, No, no, No, it will go to a million.” million.” million.” , then I will sell.” million.” Then the stock Then the stock Joe wouldn’t sell at $900,000. Then the Stock Then the stock began to go down very rapidly. After a little, After a little, In a few days it got down to where Mrs. Goodman succeeded in getting Joe to sell—so After a little, After a little, Joe sold, and he got out with $600,000 $600,000 $600,000. $600,000 cash. Denis Denis Dennis waited for the million, but he never got a cent. His holding was His holding was It His holding was His holding was sold for the “mud”—so that he he Dennis he he came out without anything and had to begin again setting type. That is the story, as it was told to me many many so many many years ago—I imagine by Joe Goodman, I don’t remember now. Denis Denis Dennis , by and by, died poor,—never got a start again. a start again. enough to a start again.—he ought to have had one. a start again. Joe Goodman immediately went into the broker broker brokers broker business. $600,000 $600,000 $600,000. $600,000 was just good capital. He wasn’t in a position to retire yet. And he sent me the three hundred dollars, three hundred dollars, $300., $300, and said that now he had started in the broking business and that he was making an abundance of money. I didn’t hear any more then for a long time; then time; then time; , and then comma mended to a semicolon time; then I learned that he he Joe he he had not been content with mere broking broking broking business broking but had speculated on his own account and lost everything he had. And when that happened, John Mackay, who was always a good friend of the unfortunate, unfortunate, unfortunate, unfortunate, lent lent gave lent lent him $4,000 $4,000 four thousand dollars to buy a grape ranch with in in out in in Fresno County, and Joe went up there. He didn’t know anything about the grape culture, but he and his wife wife wife lived most economically, and Joe wife learned it it the grape culture it it in a very little while. He learned it a little better than better than before better than better than anybody else, and and so he and and got a good living out of it until 1886 or ’87; ’87; ’87; . He came East then. He told me he had just sold his ranch for a considerable sum of money. He had got a good living out of it all this time and period mended to a semicolon ’87; then he sold it for several times what he paid for it originally. He He I lost sight of Goodman again—now and then a letter— By and by he married again. He He was here a year ago and I saw him. him. him. , his wife, and several lovely little children. him. He lives lives lives in great comfort lives in the garden of California—in Alameda. Before this eastern visit he Before this eastern visit he And that chap, before that, Before this eastern visit he Before this eastern visit he had been putting in twelve years of his time in the most unpromising and difficult and stubborn study that anybody has undertaken since Champollion’s time; since Champollion’s time; since— Champollion’s time; since Champollion’s time; for he undertook to find out what those sculptures mean that they find down there in the forests of Central America. And he did find out; and out; and out—; and out; and published a great book book big book book , the result of his twelve years of study. In In And i In In this book he furnishes the meanings of those hieroglyphs hieroglyphs hieroglyphics hieroglyphs —and his position as a successful expert in that complex study is recognized by the scientists in that line in London and Berlin, and elsewhere. But he is no better known than he was before—he is known only only only only to those people. His people. His people—. His people. His book was published in about 1901. This account in the New York Times in the New York Times here in the N.Y. Times in the N.Y. Times says that in consequence of that strike in the great Bonanza a tempest of speculation ensued, and that the group of mines right around that centre centre center reached a value in the stock market of close upon $400,000,000 $400,000,000 four hundred millions of dollars ; and six months after that, that that, that that, that that, that value had been reduced by three-quarters; three-quarters; three-quarters,; comma mended to a semicolon three-quarters; and by 1880, five years later, the stock of the “Consolidated Virginia” “Consolidated Virginia” Consolidated Virginia was under $2 $2 two dollars a share, and the stock in the “California” the “California” the California the California was only $1.75—for the Bonanza was now confessedly exhausted.