26 May 1906 Saturday, May 26, 1906 Mr. Clemens becomes his own publisher and makes Webster general agent in firm of Webster and Company, Company, Co. Publishers—Webster publishes “Huckleberry Finn” successfully—Whitford of firm of Alexander and Green draws the the the not in contract—Lecture tour with George Cable—Farewell address on 19th of April. As I have already remarked, I had imported my nephew-in-law, Webster, from the village of Dunkirk, New York, to conduct that original first patent-right business for me, at a salary of fifteen hundred dollars. That enterprise had lost forty-two forty-two forty-two forty-two thousand dollars for me, so I thought this a favorable time to close it up. I proposed to be my own publisher now, and let young Webster do the work. He thought he ought to have twenty-five hundred dollars a year while he was learning the trade. I took a day or two to consider the matter and study it out searchingly. So far as I could see, this was a new idea. I remembered that printers’ apprentices got no no no ‘no’ underscored no salary. Upon inquiry I found that this was the case with stone masons, masons, masons, masons, brick masons, tinners, and the rest. I found that not even lawyers or apprenticed doctors got any salary for learning the trade. I remembered that on the river an apprentice pilot not only got nothing in the way of salary but he also had to pay some pilot a sum in cash which he didn’t have—a large sum. It was what I had done myself. I had paid Bixby a a one a a hundred dollars, and it was borrowed money. I was told by a person who said he was studying for the ministry that even Noah got no salary for the first six months—partly on account of the weather and partly because he was learning navigation. The upshot of these thinkings and searchings of mine was that I believed I had secured something entirely new to history in Webster. And also I believed that a young backwoodsman who was starting life in New York without any equipment of any kind, without proved value of any kind, without prospective value of any kind, yet able without blinking an eye to propose to learn a trade at another man’s expense and charge for this benefaction an annual sum greater than any President President president of the United States had ever been able to save out of his pay for running the most difficult country on the planet, after Ireland, must surely be worth securing—and instantly—lest he get away. I believed that if some of his gigantic interest in No. 1 could be diverted to the protection of No. 2, the result would be fortune enough for me. I erected Webster into a firm—a firm entitled Webster and Company, Publishers—and installed him in a couple of offices at a modest rental, on the second floor of a building somewhere below Union Square, I don’t remember where. For assistants he had a girl, and perhaps a masculine clerk of about eight-hundred-dollar eight-hundred-dollar eight hundred dollar size. For a while Webster had another helper. This was a man who had long been in the subscription-book business, knew all about it, and was able to teach it to Webster—which he did—I paying the cost of tuition. did—I paying the cost of tuition. did.— I paying the cost of tuition. did, I paying the cost of tuition. I am talking about the early part of 1884 now. 1884 1884 (1884) I handed Webster a competent capital and along with it I handed him the manuscript manuscript MS. of “Huckleberry Finn.” Webster’s function was general agent. It was his business to appoint sub-agents throughout the country. At that time there were sixteen of these sub-agencies. They had canvassers under them who did the canvassing. In New York City Webster was his own sub-agent. Before ever any of these minor details that I am talking about had entered into being, being, being, being, the careful Webster had suggested that a contract be drawn and signed and sealed before we made any real move. That seemed sane, though I should not have thought of it myself—I mean it was sane because because because ‘because’ underscored because I had not thought of it myself. So Webster got his friend Whitford to draw the contract. I was coming to admire Webster very much, and at this point in the proceedings I had one of those gushing generosities surge up in my system; system; system; system; and before I had thought, I had tried to confer upon Webster a tenth interest in the business in addition to his salary, free of charge. Webster declined promptly—with thanks, of course, the usual kind. That raised him another step in my admiration. I knew perfectly well that I was offering him a partnership interest which would pay him two or three times his salary within the next nine months, but he didn’t know that. He was coldly and wisely discounting all my prophecies about “Huckleberry Finn’s” high commercial value. And here was this new evidence that in Webster I had found a jewel, a man who would not get excited; a man who would not lose his head; a cautious man; a man who would not take a risk of any kind in fields unknown to him. Except at somebody else’s expense, I mean. The contract was drawn, as I say, by Whitford. Dunkirk, New York, produced Whitford as well as Webster, and has not yet gotten over the strain. Whitford was privileged to sign himself “of the firm of Alexander and Green.” Alexander and Green had a great and lucrative business and not enough conscience to damage it—a fact which came out rather prominently last year when the earthquake came which shook the entrails out of the three great Life Insurance Companies. Alexander and Green had their offices in the Mutual Building. They kept a job lot of twenty-five lawyers on salary, and Whitford was one of these. He was good-natured, obliging, and immensely ignorant, and was endowed with a stupidity which by the least little stretch would go around the globe four times and tie. That first contract was all right. There was nothing the matter with it. It placed all obligations, all expenses, all liability, all responsibilities upon me, where they belonged. It was a happy combination, Webster and Whitford. The amount that the two together didn’t know about anything was to me a much more awful and paralysing paralysing paralyzing spectacle than it would be to see the the The Milky Way get wrecked and drift off in rags and patches through the sky. When it came to courage, moral or physical, they hadn’t any. Webster was afraid to venture anything in the way of business without first getting a lawyer’s assurance that there was nothing jailable about it. Whitford was consulted so nearly constantly that he was about as much a member of the staff as was the girl and the subscription expert. But as neither Webster nor Whitford had had any personal experience of money, money, money, money, Whitford was not an expensive incumbent, though he probably thought he was. At the break of the autumn I went off with George W. Cable on a four months’ reading-campaign reading-campaign reading-campaign reading-campaign in the East and West—the last platform work which I was ever to do in this life in my own country. I resolved at the time that I would never rob the public from the platform again unless driven to it by pecuniary pecuniary peculiarniary pecuniary compulsions. After eleven years the pecuniary pecuniary peculiarniary pecuniary compulsions came, and I lectured all around the globe. Ten years have since lapsed, during which time I have only lectured for public charities and without pay. On the 19th of last month I took a public and formal leave of the platform—a thing which I had not done before—in a lecture on Robert Fulton for the benefit of the Robert Fulton Memorial Memorial Monument Fund. I seem to be getting pretty far away from Webster and Whitford, Whitford, Whitford, Whitford, but it’s no matter. It is one of those cases where distance lends enchantment enchantment enchantment enchentment to the view. Webster was successful with “Huckleberry Finn,” Finn,” Finn,” Finn,” and a year later a year later a year later Hobby was presumably making a correction, not a revision, and Clemens approved it a year later handed me the firm’s check for fifty-four thousand five hundred dollars, which included the fifteen thousand dollars capital capital capital (15,000) ‘(15,000)’ inserted by Hobby and deleted by SLC capital which I had originally handed to him. him. Webb.ster. him. name corrected by Hobby, then revised by SLC him. Once more I experienced a new birth. I have been born more times than anybody except Krishna, I suppose.