16 October 1906 Tuesday, October 16, 1906 Reminiscences of Charles Dudley Warner and Uncle Remus—Anecdote of Jim Wolf Wolf Wolfe and the wasps. Warner Warner Warner . . . . Warner . . . Warner is gone. Stockton is gone. I attended both funerals. Warner was a near neighbor, from the autumn of ’71 until his death, nineteen years afterward. It is not the privilege of the most of us to have many intimate friends—a dozen is our aggregate—but I think he could count his by the score. It is seldom that a man is so beloved by both sexes and all ages as Warner was. There was a charm about his spirit, and his ways, and his words, that won all that came within the sphere of its influence. Our children adopted him while they were little creatures, and thenceforth, to the end, he was “Cousin Charley” “Cousin Charley” Cousin Charley “Cousin Charley” “Cousin Charley” to them. He was “Uncle Charley” “Uncle Charley” Uncle Charley “Uncle Charley” “Uncle Charley” to the children of more than one other friend. Mrs. Clemens was very fond of him, and he always called called called challed her by her first name—shortened. Warner died, as she died, and as I would die—without premonition, without a moment’s warning. Uncle Remus still lives, and must be over a thousand years old. Indeed Indeed Indeed Indeed, I know that this must be so, because I have seen a new photograph of him in the public prints within the last month or so, and in that picture his aspects are distinctly and strikingly geological, and one can see that that that not in he is thinking about the mastodons and the plesiosaurians that he used to play with when he was young. It is just a quarter of a century since I have seen Uncle Remus. He visited us in our home in Hartford and was reverently devoured by the big eyes of Susy and Clara,— Clara,— Clara, Clara,— dash added by SLC, deleted by Munro for I I I I I illegible revision canceled made a deep and awful impression upon the little creatures, creatures, creatures— creatures—, creatures, who knew his book by heart through my nightly declamation of its tales to them—by revealing to them privately that he was the real Uncle Remus whitewashed whitewashed whitewashed, whitewashed so that he could come into people’s houses the front way. He was the bashfulest bashfulest bashfulest bashfullest grown person I have ever met. When there were people about he stayed stayed staid stayed silent, and seemed to suffer until they were gone. But he was lovely, nevertheless; for the sweetness and benignity of the immortal Remus looked out from his eyes, and the graces and sincerities of his character shone in his face. It may be that Jim Wolf Wolf Wolfe Wolf was as bashful as Harris. It hardly seems possible, yet as I look back fifty-six years and consider Jim Wolf, Wolf, Wolfe, Wolf, I am almost persuaded that he was. He was our long long long, long slim apprentice in my brother’s printing-office in Hannibal. However, in an earlier chapter I have already introduced him. He was the lad whom I assisted with uninvited advice and sympathy the night he had the memorable adventure with the cats. However . . . cats. However . . . cats. However . . . cats. not in He was seventeen, and yet he was as much as four times as bashful as I was, though I was only fourteen. He boarded and slept in the house, but he was always tongue-tied in the presence of my sister, and when even my gentle mother spoke to him he could not answer save in frightened monosyllables. He would not enter a room where a girl was; nothing could persuade him to do such a thing. Once when he was in our small parlor alone, alone, alone, alone, two majestic old maids entered and seated themselves in such a way that Jim could not escape without passing by them. He would as soon have thought of passing by one of Harris’s plesiosaurians plesiosaurians plesiosaurians, plesiosaurians ninety feet long. I came in presently, was charmed with the situation, and sat down in a corner to watch Jim suffer, and enjoy it. My mother followed, followed, followed, followed a minute later, later, later, later and sat down with the visitors and began to talk. Jim sat upright in his chair, and during a quarter of an hour he did not change his position by a shade—neither General Grant nor a bronze image could have maintained that immovable pose more successfully. I mean as to body and limbs; with the face there was a difference. By fleeting revealments of the face I saw that something was happening—something out of the common. There would be a sudden twitch of the muscles of the face, an instant distortion, which in the next instant had passed and left no trace. These twitches gradually grew in frequency, but no muscle outside of the face lost any of its rigidity, or betrayed any interest in what was happening to Jim. I mean if something was was was ‘was’ underscored was happening to him, and I knew perfectly well that that was the case. At last a pair of tears began to swim slowly down his cheeks amongst the twitchings, but Jim sat still and let them run; then I saw his right hand steal along his thigh until half way half way half-way to his knee, then take a vigorous grip upon the cloth. That was a wasp wasp wasp wasp ‘wasp’ underscored wasp that he was grabbing! grabbing! grabbing. grabbing.! period mended to an exclamation point grabbing! A colony of them were climbing up his legs and prospecting around, and every time he winced they stabbed him to the hilt—so for a quarter of an hour one group of excursionists after another climbed up Jim’s legs and resented even the slightest wince or squirm that he indulged himself with, with, with with, with, in his misery. When the entertainment had become nearly unbearable, he conceived the idea of gripping them between his fingers and putting them out of commission. He succeeded with many of them, but at great cost, for, for, for for, for, as he couldn’t see the wasp, wasp, wasp wasp, wasp, he was as likely to take hold of the wrong end of him as he was the right; then the dying wasp gave him a punch to remember the incident by. If those ladies had stayed stayed staid stayed all day, and if all the wasps in Missouri had come and climbed up Jim’s legs, nobody there would ever have known it but Jim and the wasps wasps wasps, wasps and me. There he would have sat until the ladies left. When [¶] When no ¶ When ¶ When [¶] When they finally went away finally went away were gone were gone finally went away finally went away we went up stairs up stairs upstairs up-stairs and he took his clothes off, and his legs were a picture to look at. They looked as if they were mailed all over with shirt-buttons, shirt-buttons, shirt buttons, shirt buttons, each with a single red hole in the centre centre center centre . The pain was intolerable—no, would have been intolerable, but the pain of the presence of those ladies had been so much harder to bear that the pain of the wasps’ stings was quite pleasant and enjoyable by comparison. Jim never could enjoy wasps. I remember once—— once—— once—— once—