31 October 1908 Dictated October 31, 1908 Dictated October 31, 1908 Dictated Oct. 31, 1908 Paragraph clipped from the news columns a day or two ago: Widow Provided For, Butters Butters Buttters Butters Fortune Goes to Student Son. (Special to The World.) SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 29.—Having been handsomely provided for by Henry Butters, the Oakland capitalist, before his death last Monday, the widow and her two daughters by a former marriage will not sue to break the will, will, will will, which leaves practically everything to Henry Butters jr, son, now a student at Phillips-Exeter Academy in New Hampshire. Butters’s fortune is thought to be close to a million dollars. It was made in a South African tramway line. So Butters has escaped. I seem to have no luck, lately. My case is like William William Wm. Wm. C. Prime’s. Prime was a gushing pietist; religion was his daily tipple; he was always under the influence. Seldom actually and solidly solidly dead solidly solidly drunk with holiness, but always on the verge of it, always dizzy, boozy, twaddlesome. But there was another and a pleasanter side to him: when he wasn’t praying, praying, praying for himself, praying, for himself, when he wasn’t praising God intemperately, he was damning to the nethermost hell three or four men whom he hated with his whole heart, and imploring the Throne of Grace to keep them alive so that he could go on hating and damning them and be happy. Chiefest of these was Mr. Lincoln’s great Secretary of War, Edmund Edmund the hom Edmund Edmund M. Stanton. When Stanton died, in 1869, Prime was doing the Nile with his brother-in-law, the distinguished philologist of Hartford, Hammond Trumbull. One day, when the dahabieh was tied up to the bank near Luxor, Prime was ashore lounging lounging walking walking lounging up and down in the rich gloaming and pouring out ecstasies of pious gratitude to the Creator for permitting His His his His worm to see this sumptuous loveliness while yet in the flesh. An ascending dahabieh handed Trumbull the sad news of our nation’s bereavement. He stepped ashore to break it to Prime. Then he Then he Then He Then he stopped and respectfully waited, for Prime was doing an attitude—doing it in his best theatrical style, with one eye furtively cocked toward Heaven Heaven Heaven, Heaven to see if it was being noticed up there. And he was working off his panegyric, and stacking up his grateful adorations mountains mountains mountains. mountains high. He finished with an eloquent burst and a self-satisfied nod of the head, as who should say, “There—put that in your archives.” Then Trumbull told him. There was a sudden change. Prime shook his fist at the sky and shouted venomously: “You’ve taken him—taken my all and left me a pauper! Humbly Humbly Humbly Hum-‖bly and faithfully have I served You from the cradle up, and this is what I get for it!” Butters has escaped, and now I am likewise likewise not in likewise poor indeed. He has been my pet aversion, my heart’s detested detested detested detested darling, for nearly seven years; and years; and years. And years.; and period mended to a semicolon now, now, now now, for no sufficient reason, no even plausible excuse, he is taken from me. I would rather have lost thirty uncles. Butters was easily the meanest white man, and the most degraded in spirit spirit spirit spirit, and contemptible in character I have ever known; and next to him ranks ranks was ranks ranks his lawyer, William W. Baldwin, whom God preserve! He still lives. Still lives to compete with the polecat and outsmell him. He is my only comfort now. He is my only comfort now. He is my only comfort now. He is my only comfort now. Butters the millionaire came to me recommended by his devoted friend, an honorable and high-minded man, John Hays Hammond; and he at once set his traps and played a “confidence game” upon me. To what end? Merely to swindle me out of an infinitely trivial sum of money— money— money— money— typed hyphen retraced to make a dash twelve thousand dollars. He succeeded. The lies and the treacheries it cost him to achieve this small thing— thing— thing— thing— typed hyphen retraced to make a dash why, an ordinary scoundrel would not have taken that amount of trouble for less than a million. He escaped to California, and there he had to remain. He dearly wanted to live in New York, but he had to forego that delight, and has chafed and lamented in exile for six years. He knew he would retire to the penitentiary if he ventured into this State State State state , and so he stayed out of it. Three years ago, in a short story entitled “A Horse’s Tale” I made one of the horses describe Butters by name and character; and for this bit bit bit bit inserted into a space left for the word, which the typist could not read in the MS of pleasantry Butters commissioned his legal serf in New York to bring against me a libel suit—and he placed the damages at fifty thousand dollars! Damage to his reputation, you understand. Whereas it couldn’t be damaged, by any process known to science; there wasn’t a place on it the size of a hydrogen molecule that wasn’t already rotten. And now he is dead, and alas alas alas alas the suit suit suit underscore canceled suit is taken away from me; I am robbed of even that chance to be gleeful. It is an odious world. That suit, tried in open court, with the latitude which such suits permit, would have been the comedy of the century! A Brooklyn Brooklyn Booklyn Brooklyn evening paper of yesterday has a telegram from California which contains further tidings of the bereavement which has befallen me. To To T To corrected miswriting To this effect: Butters, in his will, has cut off his wife wife wife of wife (his second, who lately opened divorce proceedings against him) with nothing; has cut her her his his her daughters off with five dollars apiece, and has left the remainder of his swag swag millions swag swag to his son. Has left him his name, too—Butters—and so he is the worst off of the family after all, for the daughters are married and the widow can change her name, for she is young and handsome and good.