7 July 1908 Dictated at Innocence at Home, July 7, 1908 Dictated at Innocence at Home, July 7, 1908 Dictated at Innocence at Home. July 7, 1908. originally ‘Innocence at Home. | Dictated July 7, 1908.’ Murat Halstead’s death—His life contrasted with that of Mr. Clemens—The incident of Murat Halstead getting left on steamer and going to Germany with Mr. Clemens and his family and Bayard Taylor—The coincidence of Halstead and Taylor thinking they had heart disease and the way in which they were cured of that belief. But not now—after a few minutes. Murat Halstead is dead. He was a most likable man. He lived to be not far short of eighty, and he devoted about sixty years to diligent, hard slaving at editorial work. His life and mine make a curious contrast. From the time that my father died, March 24, March 24, March 24 1847, when I was past eleven past eleven twelve past eleven years old, until the end of 1856, or the first days of 1857, I worked—not diligently, not willingly, but fretfully, lazily, repiningly, complainingly, disgustedly, and always shirking the work when I was not watched. The statistics show that I was a worker during about about about ten years. I am approaching seventy-three, and I believe I have never done any work since—unless I may call two or three years of lazy effort as a reporter on the Pacific coast coast Coast by that large and honorable name—and so I think I am substantially right in saying that when I escaped from the printing-office fifty or fifty-one years ago I ceased to be a worker, and ceased permanently. Piloting on the Mississippi River was not work to me; it was play—delightful play, vigorous play, adventurous play—and I loved it; silver mining in the Humboldt Mountains Mountains mountains was play, only play, because I did not do any of the work; my pleasant comrades did it and I sat by and admired; my silver mining in Esmeralda was not work, for Higbie and Robert Howland did it, and again I sat by and admired. I accepted a job of shoveling tailings in a quartz mill there, and that was really work, and I had to do it myself, but I retired from that industry at the end of two weeks, and not only with my own approval approval cordial approval but with the approval approval cordial approval of the people who paid the wages. These mining experiences occupied ten months, and came to an end toward the close of September 1862. I then became a reporter, in Virginia City, Nevada, and later in San Francisco, and after something more than two years of this salaried indolence I retired from my position on the Morning Call, by solicitation. Solicitation solicitation. Solicitation invitation solicitation. Solicitation of the proprietor. Then I acted as San Franciscan correspondent of the Virginia City Enterprise for two or three months; next I spent three months in pocket-mining at Jackass Gulch with the Gillis boys; then I went to the Sandwich Islands and corresponded thence for the Sacramento Union five or six months; in October 1866 I broke out as a lecturer, and from that day to this I have always been able to gain my living without doing any work; for the writing of books and magazine matter was always play, not work. I enjoyed it; it was merely billiards to me. I wonder why Murat Halstead was condemned to sixty years of editorial slavery and I let off with a lifetime of delightful idleness. There seems to be something most unfair about this—something not justifiable. But it seems to be a law of the human constitution that those that deserve shall not have, and those that do not deserve shall get everything that is worth having. It is a sufficiently crazy arrangement, it seems to me. On the 10th of April, a little more than thirty years ago, I sailed for Germany in the steamer Holsatia Holsatia Holsatia with my little family—at least we got ready to sail, but at the last moment concluded to remain at our anchorage in the Bay to see what the weather was going to be. A great many people came down in a tug to say good-bye to the passengers, and at dark, when we had concluded to go sea, they left us. When the tug was gone it was found that Murat Halstead was still with us; he had come to say good-bye to his wife and daughter; he had to remain with us, there was no alternative. We presently went to sea. Halstead had no clothing with him except what he had on, and there was a fourteen-day voyage in front of him. By happy fortune there was one man on board who was as big as Halstead, and only that one man; he could get into that man’s clothes but not into any other man’s in that company. That lucky accident was Bayard Taylor; he was an unusually large man and just the size of Halstead, and he had an abundance of clothes and was glad to share them with Halstead, who was a close friend of his of long standing. Toward midnight I was in the smoking-cabin with them and then a curious fact came out: they had not met for ten years, and each was surprised to see the other looking so bulky and hearty and so rich in health; each had for years been expecting to hear of the other’s death; for when they had last parted both had received death sentence at the hands of the physician. Heart disease in both cases, with death certain within two years. Both were required to lead a quiet life, walk and not run, climb no stairs when not obliged to do it, and above all things avoid surprises and sudden excitements, if possible. They understood that a single sudden and violent excitement would be quite sufficient for their needs and would promptly end their days, and so for ten years these men had been creeping creeping walking creeping and never trotting nor running; they had climbed stairs at gravel-train speed only, and they had avoided excitements diligently and constantly—and all that time they were as hearty as a pair of elephants and could not understand why they continued to live. Then something happened. And it happened to both at about the same time. The thing that happened was a sudden and violent surprise followed immediately by another surprise—surprise that they didn’t fall dead in their tracks. These surprises happened about a week before the Holsatia Holsatia Holsatia sailed. Halstead was editor and proprietor of the Cincinnati Enquirer, and was sitting at his editorial desk at midnight, high up in the building, when a mighty explosion occurred, close by, which rocked the building to its foundations and shivered all its glass, and before Halstead had time to reflect and not let the explosion excite him, he had sailed down six flights of stairs in thirty-five seconds and was standing panting in the street trying trying before trying to say “Thy will be done,” and deadly afraid deadly afraid fully expecting deadly afraid that that was what was going to happen. But nothing happened, and from that time forth he had been an emancipated man, and now for a whole week had been making up for ten years’ lost time, hunting for excitements and devouring them like a famished person. Bayard Taylor’s experience had been of the like character. He turned a corner in the country and crossed a railway track just in time for an express train to nip to nip cow-catcher to nip a corner off the seat of his breeches seat of his breeches heel of his shoe and seat of his breeches and and blow him into the next county by compulsion compulsion the force compulsion of the hurricane hurricane wind hurricane produced by the onrush of the train. He mourned and lamented, thinking that the fatal surprise had come at last; then he put his hand on his heart and got another surprise, for he found that it was still beating. He rose up and dusted himself off and became jubilant, and gave praise, and went off like Halstead to hunt up some more excitements and make up for ten years’ lost time. Bayard Taylor was on his way to Berlin as our new Minister to Germany; he was a genial, lovable, simple-hearted simple-hearted simple-hearted soul, and as happy in his new dignity as ever a new plenipotentiary was since the world began. He was a poet, and had written voluminously in verse, and had also made the best of all English translations of Goethe’s “Faust.” “Faust.” Faust. But all his poetry is forgotten now except two very fine songs, one about the Scotch soldiers singing “Annie Laurie” “Annie Laurie” Annie Laurie in the trenches before Sebastopol Sebastopol Sebastapool , and the other the tremendously inspiriting love song of an Arab lover to his sweetheart. No one has gathered together his odds and ends and started a memorial museum with them, and if he is still able to think and reflect he is glad of it. He had a prodigious memory, and one night while we were walking the deck he undertook to call up out of the deeps of his mind a yard-long list of queer and quaint and unrelated words which he had learned, as a boy, by reading the list twice over, for a prize, and had easily won it for the reason that the other competitors after studying the list an hour were not able to recite it without making mistakes. Taylor said he had not thought of that list since that time, but was sure he could reproduce it after half an hour’s digging in his mind. We walked the deck in silence during the half hour, then he began with the first word and sailed glibly through without a halt, and also without a mistake, he said. He had a negro manservant manservant man-servant with him who came on board dressed up in the latest agony of the fashion and looking as fine as a rainbow; then he disappeared and we never saw him again for ten or twelve days; then he came on deck on deck on deck drooping and meek, subdued, subjugated, the most completely wilted and disreputable-looking disreputable-looking disreputable looking flower that was ever seen outside of a conservatory or inside of it either. The mystery was soon explained. The sea had gotten his works out of order the first day on board, the first day on board, at once, the first day on board, and he went to the ship’s doctor to acquire a purge. The doctor gave him fourteen large pills and told him, in German, to take one every three hours till he found relief; but he didn’t understand German, so he took the whole fourteen at one dose, with the result above recorded.