My Autobiography [Random Extracts from It] My Autobiography [Random Extracts from It] title My Autobiography . . . It] not in MS reads as follows (the cancellation is a corrected miswriting): My Autobiography [Random Extracts from it.] We are no other than a moving row Of Magic Shadow-shapes that come and go Round with the Sun-illumined Lantern held In Midnight by the Master of the Show; But helpless Pieces of the Game He plays Upon th Upon this Chequer-board of Nights and Days; Hither and thither moves, and checks, and slays, And one by one back in the Closet lays. From Chapter II. * * * * So ¶ * * * * So ¶ * * * * So flush left [1900] ¶ three ellipsis points So much for the earlier days, and the New England branch of the Clemenses. The other brother settled in the South, and is remotely responsible for me. He has collected his reward generations ago, whatever it was. He went South with South with textual note: On the verso of MS page 1, which ends with these words, and upside down in relation to the recto text, SLC wrote in ink, and deleted in pencil, ‘so sorry she had been asleep, but I reckoned she got considerable comfort’; the page is numbered 29A and was evidently discarded from another MS. his particular friend friend friend, friend Fairfax, Fairfax, Fairfax, and at first Fairfax, and settled in Maryland with him, but afterward went further and made his home in Virginia. This is the Fairfax Fairfax Fair-fax who was Washington’s friend fax from fax Fairfax whose descendants were to enjoy a curious distinction—that of being American-born English earls. The founder of the house was Lord General Lord General General Lord General Fairfax of the Parliamentary army, in Cromwell’s time. The earldom, which is of recent date, earldom, which is of recent date, earldom earldom, which is of recent date, came to the American Fairfaxes through the failure of of of the Amer of male male mail male heirs in England. Old residents of San Francisco will remember “Charley,” the American earl of the mid-’60s— the mid-’60s— thirty-five years ago— the mid-60s— the mid-sixties— tenth tenth tenth Tenth Lord Fairfax according to Burke’s Peerage, and holder of a modest public office of some sort or other in the new mining town of Virginia City, Nevada. He was never out of America. I knew him, but not intimately. He had a golden character, and that was all his fortune. He laid his title aside, and gave it a holiday until his circumstances should improve to a degree consonant with its its his its its dignity; but that time never came, I think. He was a manly man, and had fine generosities in his make-up. A prominent and pestilent creature named Ferguson Ferguson F— Ferguson , who was always picking quarrels with better men than himself, picked one with him, one day, and Fairfax knocked him down. Ferguson Ferguson F— Ferguson gathered himself up and went off mumbling threats. Fairfax carried no arms, and refused to carry any now, though his friends warned him that Ferguson Ferguson F— Ferguson was of a treacherous disposition and would be be be be sure to take revenge by base means sooner or later. Nothing happened for several days; then Ferguson Ferguson F— Ferguson took the earl the earl him the earl the earl by surprise and snapped a revolver at his breast. Fairfax wrenched the pistol from him and was going to shoot him, but the man fell on his knees and begged fell on his knees and begged begged fell on his knees and begged , and said “Don’t kill me—I have a wife and children.” Fairfax was in a towering passion, but the the hi the the appeal reached his heart, and he said, “They have done me no harm,” and he let the rascal go. Back ¶ Back ¶ Back I. ¶ Back of the Virginian Virginian Virginian Virginia Clemenses is a dim procession of ancestors stretching stretching stre stretching corrected miswriting stretching back to Noah’s time. According to tradition, some of them were pirates and slavers and slavers and slavers and slavers in Elizabeth’s time. But this is no discredit to them, for so were Drake and Hawkins and the others. It was a respectable trade, then, and monarchs were partners in it. In my time I have had desires to be a pirate myself. The reader—if he will look deep down in his secret heart, will find—but never mind what he will find there: there: there: there; I am not writing his Autobiography, but mine. But . . . then, . . . pirate . . . mine. But . . . then, . . . part pirate . . . mine. inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over But . . . then, . . . pirate . . . mine. Later, according to tradition, one of the procession the procession them procession the procession was Ambassador to Spain in the time of James I James I James James I , or of Charles I, and married there and sent down a strain of Spanish blood to warm us up. Also, according to tradition, this one or another—Geoffrey Clement, by name—helped to sentence Charles to death. I no ¶ I no ¶ I ¶ I have not examined into these traditions myself, partly because I was indolent indolent lazy indolent , and partly because I was so busy polishing up this end of the line and trying to make it showy; but the other Clemenses claim that they have made the examination and that it stood the test. Therefore I have always taken for granted that I did help Charles out of his troubles, by ancestral proxy. My instincts have persuaded me, too. Whenever we have a strong and persistent and ineradicable instinct, we may be sure that it is not original with us, but inherited—inherited from away back, and hardened and perfected by the petrifying influence of time. Now I have been always and unchangingly bitter against Charles, and I am quite certain that this feeling trickled down to to in to to me through the veins of my forebears from the heart of that judge; for it is not my my b my my disposition to be bitter against people on my own personal account. I am not bitter against Jeffreys. I ought to be, but I am not. It indicates that my ancestors of James II’s time of James II’s time of James II’s time of James II’s time were indifferent to him; I do not know why; I never could make it out; but that is what it indicates. And I have always felt friendly toward Satan. Of course that is ancestral; it must be in the blood, blood, blood; blood, for I could not have originated it. it. it. My prejudice against Charles never experiences any abatement. Twenty years ago in Hartford, when I learned that some Amer a family of American idiots in my neighborhood were holding a lugubrious function in regretful memory of the Martyr’s execution-day it put me in such a temper that I wanted to go over and burn them out. It was well for them, and for me, that it was such a blustering January day and the snow-drifts so formidable; for otherwise we I might have done something to make them regret Charles’s accident more than ever, and myself sorry that I ever heard about that he ever had one. And in London last January when the remnant of existing Jacobites bewailed Charles’s irreparable loss, which they can’t seem to get used to, and had an impressive lament over it in a church, and hung immortelles and hung immortelles on his statue, and sent their humble “condolences” and allegiance to the “rightful Queen of England” in Bavaria, it incited me to acts of impropriety, the just as in the earlier days. But nothing happened to the immortelles; there were policemen there; they did not go away till after sunrise. it. . . . And . . . And And . . . And so, by the testimony of instinct, backed by the assertions of Clemenses who said they had examined the records, I have always been obliged to believe that Geoffrey Geoffrey Geoffry Geoffrey Clement the martyr-maker was an ancestor of mine, and to regard him with favor, and in fact pride. This has not had a good effect upon me, for it has made me vain, vain, vain, whereas vain, and that is a fault. It has made me set myself myself myself up myself above people who were less fortunate in their ancestry than I, and has moved me to take them down a peg, upon occasion, and say things to them which hurt them before company. A case of the kind happened in Berlin several several five several years ago. William Walter Phelps was our Minister at the Emperor’s Court, then, and one evening he had me to dinner to meet Count S., a cabinet minister. This nobleman was of long and illustrious descent. Of Count S., . . . Of the Empress Frederick’s Hofmeister, Count Seckendorff. This nobleman was descended from the Seckendorff whom Wilhelmina, Margravine of Bayreuth, has made immortal in her Memoirs. Of Count S., . . . Of Count S—, . . . Of Count S., . . . Of course I wanted to let let el let let out the fact that I had had had had had some ancestors, too; but I did not want to pull them out of their graves by the ears, and I never could seem to get a a a the chance to work them in in in in anything in a way that would look sufficiently sufficiently properly sufficiently sufficiently casual. I suppose Phelps was in the same difficulty. In fact he looked distraught, now and then—just as a person looks who wants to uncover an ancestor purely by accident, and cannot think of a way that will seem accidental enough. But at last, after dinner, he made a try. He took us about his drawing-room, showing us the pictures, and finally stopped before a rude and ancient engraving. It was a picture of the court that tried Charles I. There was a pyramid of judges in Puritan slouch hats, and below them three bare-headed bare-headed un bare-headed bare-headed secretaries seated at a table. Mr. Phelps put his finger upon one of the three, and said with exulting exulting exulting studied exulting exulting indifference— “An ancestor of mine.” I put my finger on a judge, and retorted with scathing languidness— “Ancestor of mine. But it is a small matter. I have others.” It was not noble in me to do it. I have always regretted it since. But it landed him. I wonder how he felt? felt? felt? felt! However, it made no difference in our friendship; which shows that he was fine and high, notwithstanding the humbleness of his his its his his origin origin origimn corrected miswriting origin . And it was also creditable in me, too, that I could overlook it. I made no change in my bearing toward him, but always treated him as an equal. But it was a hard night for me in one way. Mr. Mr. Mr. Mr. Phelps thought I was the guest of honor, and so did Count S.; S.; Seckendorff; S.; S., S.; but I didn’t, for there was nothing in my invitation to indicate it. It was just a friendly off-hand note, on a card. It . . . off-hand . . . card. It . . . off-hand . . . card. It . . . off-hand . . . card. It . . . offhand . . . card. By the time dinner was announced Phelps was himself in a state of doubt. Something had to be done; and and and and it was not a handy time for explanations. He tried to get me to go out with him, but I held back; then he tried S., S., Seckendorff, S., S., and he also also also also declined. There was another guest, but there was no trouble about him. We finally went out in a pile. There There It There There was a decorous plunge for seats, and I got the one at Mr. Phelps’s left, the Count captured the one facing facing opposite facing Mr. facing Phelps, and and and and the other guest had to take the place of honor, since he could not help himself. We returned to the drawing-room drawing-room drawingroom drawing-room in the original disorder. I had new shoes on, and they were tight. At eleven I was privately crying privately crying crying privately crying ; I couldn’t help it; it; it; it, the pain was so cruel. Conversation had been dead for an hour. S. S. Seckendorff S. S. had been due at the bedside of a dying official ever since half past nine. At last we all rose by one blessed impulse and went down to the street door without explanations—in a pile, and no precedence —in . . . precedence —in . . . precedence —in . . . precedence ; and so, parted. parted. parted. The trouble all came of etiquette. ¶ Altogether, parted. The evening had its defects; still, I got my ancestor in, and was satisfied. Among the Virginian Clemenses were Jere. (already mentioned), Jere. (already mentioned), Jere. Jere. (already mentioned), and Sherrard. Sherrard. Sherrard. Jere. was a Senator from that State, and afterwards from Alabama. Later, he was a rebel Brigadier in the Civil War. He In his earlier days he fought a duel with Governor Wise of Virginia—the one who hanged John Brown—and got a bullet in his leg. But that just happened to happen so; for he had a wide reputation as for he was a good pistol-shot, and he must have been thinking about something else at the time or he would have crippled the governor. A person ought to concentrate his mind when he is fighting duels; but there was never a Clemens that could concentrate his mind, and for that reason I have avoided duels a good deal. Sherrard. Jere. Clemens had a wide reputation as a good pistol-shot, and once it enabled him to get on the friendly side of some drummers when they would not have paid any attention to mere smooth smooth smooth smooth words and arguments. He was out stumping the State the State the State the State at the time. The drummers The drummers They drummers The drummers were grouped in front of the stand, and had been hired by the opposition to drum while he made his speech. When he was ready to begin, he got out his revolver and laid it before him, and said in his soft, silky way— “I do not wish to hurt anybody, and shall try not to; but I have got just a bullet apiece for those six drums, and if you should want to play on them, don’t stand behind them.” them.” them.” ¶ Why, you know, they couldn’t play on them without standing behind them; and so that ended it. them.” Sherrard Clemens was a Republican Republican republican Republican Congressman from West Virginia in the war days, and then went out to St. Louis St. Louis St Louis St. Louis , where the James Clemens branch lived, and still lives lives livess lives , and there he became a warm rebel. This was after the war. war. war. B war. At the time that he was a Republican Republican republican Republican I was a rebel; but by the time he had become a rebel I was become become become become (temporarily) (temporarily) a Republican Republican republican Republican . The Clemenses have have have always tried to have always done the best they could to keep the political balances level, no matter how much it might inconvenience them. I did not know what had become of Sherrard Clemens; but once I introduced Senator Hawley to a Republican Republican republican Republican mass meeting in New England, and then I got a bitter letter from Sherrard Sherrard him Sherrard Sherrard from St. Louis. He said that the Republicans Republicans republicans Republicans of the North—no, the “mudsills of the North”—had swept away the old aristocracy of the South with fire and sword, and it ill became me, an aristocrat by blood, to train with that kind of swine. Did I forget that I was a Lambton? Lambton? Durham? Lambton? Lambton? That was a reference to my mother’s side of the house. As I have already said, she As . . . she She As . . . she was a Lambton—Lambton with a p p p p , for some of some of some of some of the American Lamptons could not spell very well in early times, and so the name suffered at their hands. She was a native of Kentucky, and married my father in Lexington in in wh in ‘h’ partly formed in 1823, when she was twenty years old and he twenty-four. Neither of them had an overplus of an overplus of much an overplus of an overplus of property. She brought him two or three negroes, negroes, ne slaves, negroes, negroes, but nothing else, I think. They removed to the remote and secluded village of Jamestown, in the mountain solitudes of east east East east ‘t’ partly formed east Tennessee. There their first crop of children their first crop of children the first detachment of their their first crop of children were born, but as I their first crop of children was born, but as I was of a later vintage I do not remember anything anything much anything about it. I was postponed—postponed to Missouri. Missouri was an unknown new State and needed attractions. I think that my eldest brother, Orion, my sisters Pamela and Margaret, and my brother Benjamin were born in Jamestown. There may have been others, but as to that I am not sure. It was a great lift for that little village to have my parents come there. It was hoped that they would stay, so that it would become a city. It was supposed that they would stay. And so there was a boom; but by and by they went away, and prices went down, and it was many years before Jamestown got another start. I have written about Jamestown in the “Gilded Age,” a book of mine, but it was from hearsay, not from personal knowledge. My father left a fine estate behind him in the region round about round about round about roundabout Jamestown—75,000 acres.Correction (1906)—it was above 100,000 it appears. 75,000 acres.* footnote: ¶ *Correction (1906)—it was above 100,000 it appears. 75,000 acres. 75,000 acres.* footnote: ¶ *Correction (1906)—it was above 100,000 it appears. 75,000 acres.* footnote: ¶ *Correction. 1906: it was above 100,000, it appears. When he died in 1847 he had owned it about twenty years. The taxes were almost nothing (five dollars a year for the whole) (five . . . whole) not in (five . . . whole) , and he had always always not in always paid them regularly and kept his title perfect. He had always said that the land would not become valuable in his time, but that it would be a commodious provision for his children some day. It contained coal, copper, iron iron iron iron, and timber, and he said that in the course of time railways would pierce to that region, and then the property would be property in fact as well as in name. It also produced a wild grape of a promising sort. He had sent some samples to Nicholas Longworth, of Cincinnati, to get his judgment upon them, and Mr. Longworth had said that they would make as good wine as his Catawbas. The land contained all these riches; and also oil, but my father did not know that, and of course in those early days in those early days in those early days in those early days he he not in he would have cared nothing about it if he had known it. The oil oil lan oil oil was not discovered until about 1895 about 1895 three years ago about 1895 . I wish I owned a couple of acres of the land now. In which case I would not be writing Autobiographies for a living for a living in Vienna for a living; no, I would be showing off before the nobility for a living . My father’s dying charge charge charge to his family charge was, “Cling to the land and wait; let nothing beguile it away from you.” My . . . you.” My . . . you.” inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over My . . . you.” My mother’s favorite cousin, James Lampton Lampton Lambton Lampton , who figures in the “Gilded Age” as “Colonel Sellers,” always said of that land—and said it with blazing enthusiasm, too,— too,— too,— too,— “There’s There’s there’s There’s millions in it—millions!” It is true that he always said that about everything—and was always mistaken, too; but this time he was right; which shows that a man man prophet ought never to get discour- man man who goes around with a prophecy-gun ought never to get discouraged: discouraged: discouraged: discouraged; if he will keep up his heart and fire at everything he sees, he is bound to hit something by and by. Many persons regarded “Colonel Sellers” as a fiction, an invention, an extravagant impossibility, and did me the honor to call him a “creation;” “creation;” “creation;” “creation”; but they were mistaken. I merely put him on paper as he was; he was not a person who could be exaggerated. The incidents which looked most extravagant, both in the book and on the stage, were not inventions of mine but were facts of his life; and I was present when they were developed. John T. Raymond’s audiences used to come near to dying with laughter over the turnip-eating scene; but, extravagant as the scene was, it was faithful to the facts, in all its absurd details. The thing happened in Lampton’s Lampton’s Lambton’s Lampton’s own house, and I was present. In fact In fact In fact In fact I was myself the guest who ate the turnips. In the hands of a great actor that piteous scene would have dimmed any manly spectator’s eyes with tears, and racked his ribs apart with laughter at the same time. But Raymond was great in humorous portrayal only only only; in all only only . In that he was superb, he was wonderful—in a word, great; in all things else he was a pigmy of the pigmies the pigmies the pigmies pigmies . The no ¶ The no ¶ The ¶ The real Colonel Sellers, as I knew him in James Lampton Lampton Lambton Lampton , was a pathetic and beautiful spirit, a manly man, a straight and honorable man, a man with a big, foolish, unselfish heart in his in his textual note: MS page 21, which ends with these words, was written on the reverse of a discarded page from a draft of Clemens’s story “Wapping Alice,” with text: ‘¶ About the middle of January that young carpenter came to do some work. (Swede, named Bjorgensen Bjackson Bjurgensen,)’. Clemens numbered the “Swedish” names, reversing their order, before canceling the passage in pencil. “Wapping Alice” was eventually inserted into the AD of 9 April 1907. bosom, a man born to be loved; and he was loved by all his friends, and by his family worshiped worshiped worshiped worshipped . It is the right word. To them he was but little less than a god. The real Colonel Sellers was never on the stage. Only half of him was there. Raymond could not play the other half of him; it was above his level. That half was made up of qualities of which Raymond was wholly destitute. For Raymond was not a manly man, he was not an honorable man nor an honest one, he was was was was empty and selfish and vulgar and ignorant and silly, and there was a vacancy in him where his heart should have been. There was only one man who could have played the whole of Colonel Sellers, and that was Frank Mayo.Raymond was playing “Colonel Sellers” in about 1876 and along there. About twenty years later Mayo dramatized “Pudd’nhead ftnt Pudd’nhead Pudden-head Pudd’nhead Wilson” and played the title rôle very delightfully. + ftnt Mayo.* footnote: ¶ *Raymond . . . delightfully. Mayo. Mayo.* footnote: ¶ *Raymond . . . delightfully. It is a world of surprises. They fall, too, where one is least expecting them. When I introduced Sellers into the book, Charles Dudley Warner, who was writing the story with me, proposed a change of Sellers’s Christian name. Ten years before, in a remote corner of the West, in a remote corner of the West, in a remote corner of the West, in a remote corner of the West, he had come across a man named Eschol Sellers, and he thought that Eschol was just the right and fitting name for our Sellers, since it was odd, and quaint, odd, and quaint, odd, and quaint, odd and quaint and all that. I liked the idea, but I said that that man might turn up and object. But Warner said it couldn’t happen; that he was doubtless dead by this time, a man with a name like that couldn’t live long; and be he be he be he be he dead or alive we must have the name, it was exactly the right one and we couldn’t do without it. So the change change change change written over a wiped-out illegible word, then deleted and interlined for clarity change was made. Warner’s man was a farmer in a cheap and humble way. When the book had been out a week, a college-bred gentleman of courtly manners and ducal upholstery arrived in Hartford in a sultry state of mind and with with with with a libel libel bu libel libel suit in his eye, and his name was Eschol Sellers! He had never had never was from had never had never heard of the other one, and had never been within a thousand miles of him. This damaged aristocrat’s This damaged aristocrat’s His This damaged aristocrat’s This damaged aristocrat’s program program program programme was quite definite and business-like business-like business-like business-like businesslike : the American Publishing Company must suppress suppress ag suppress suppress the edition as far as printed, and change the name in the plates, or stand a suit for $10,000. He carried away the Company’s promise and many apologies, and we we I we changed the name back to back to to back to Colonel Mulberry Sellers, in the plates Sellers, in the plates Sellers Sellers, in the plates . Apparently there is nothing that cannot happen. Even the existence of two unrelated men wearing wearing wearnging wearing the impossible name of Eschol Sellers is a possible thing. James Lampton Lampton Lampbton Lampton floated, all his days, in a tinted mist of magnificent dreams, and died at last without seeing one of them realized. I saw him last in 1884, when it had been twenty-six years since I ate the basin of raw turnips and washed them down with a bucket of water in his house. He was become old and white-headed, but he entered to me in the same old breezy way of his earlier life, and he was all there, yet—not a detail wanting: wanting: wanting: wanting; the happy light in his eye, the abounding hope in his heart, the persuasive tongue, the miracle-breeding imagination— they were all there; and before I could turn around he was polishing up his Aladdin’s lamp and flashing the secret riches of the world before me. I said to myself, “I did not overdraw him by a shade, shade, shade;, shade, I set him down as he was; and he is the same man to-day: to-day: to-day: to-day; to-day. Cable will recognize him.” I asked asked asked h asked corrected miswriting asked him to excuse me a moment, and ran into the next room, which was Cable’s; Cable and I were stumping the Union on a reading-tour reading-tour reading-tour reading tour . I said— said— said— said: “I am going to leave your door open, so that you can listen. There is a man in there who is interesting.” I went back and asked Lampton Lampton Lambton Lampton what he was doing, now. He began to tell me of a “small venture” he had begun in New Mexico through his son; “only a little thing—a mere trifle—partly to amuse my my mys my leisure, partly to keep my capital from lying idle, but mainly to develop the boy—develop the boy; fortune’s wheel is ever revolving, he may have to work for his living some day—as strange things have happened in this world. But it’s only a little thing—a mere trifle, as I said.” And so it was—as he began it. But under his deft hands it grew, and blossomed, and spread—oh, beyond imagination. At the end of half an hour he finished; finished with this this this the remark, uttered in an adorably languid manner: “Yes, it is but a trifle, as things go nowadays—a bagatelle—but amusing. It passes the time. The boy thinks great things of it, but he is young, you know, and imaginative; lacks the experience which comes of handling large affairs, and which tempers the fancy and perfects the judgment. I suppose there’s a couple of millions in it, possibly three three more three three , but not more, I think; still, for a boy, you know, just starting in life, it is not bad. I should not want him to make a fortune—let that come later. It could turn his head, at his time of life, and in many ways be a damage to him.” Then he said something about his having left left forgotten and left left his pocket-book lying on the table in the main drawing-room drawing-room drawing room drawing-room drawing-room at home, and about its its it’s its being after banking hours, now, and— I stopped him, him, him, and asked him to let me him, there, and begged him to honor Cable and me by being our guest at the lecture—with as many friends as might be willing to do us the like honor. He accepted. And he thanked me as a prince might who had granted us a grace. a grace. the same grace. Then a grace. The reason I stopped his speech about the tickets was because I saw that he was going to ask me to furnish them to him and let him pay next day; and I knew that if he made the debt he would pay it if he had to pawn his clothes. After a little further chat The . . . chat The . . . chat inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over The . . . chat he shook hands heartily and affectionately, and took his leave. Cable put his head in at the door, and said— “That was Colonel Sellers.” Sellers.” textual note: On verso of MS page 29, which ends with this word, and upside down in relation to the recto text, SLC wrote and deleted the page number 27 and ‘the prices are’; in pencil he wrote the following list: Parties. German Progressives ʺ People’s party ʺ Nationalists Social-democrats Clericals Young Chzechs Anti-Semites Chapter As I have said, Chapter ¶ As I have said, new page Chapter double rule ¶ As I have said, Chapter flush left As I have said, ¶ * * * As I have said, ¶ three dots As I have said, that vast vast 75,000-acres plot vast plot of Tennessee land100,000 acres. ftnt *100,000 acres. not in *100,000 acres. *100,000 acres. †100,000 acres. Tennessee land* Tennessee land the words occur on MS page 30; in the top margin of MS page 29 SLC wrote ‘Tenn land’ Tennessee land* Tennessee land* Tennessee land† was held by my father twenty years—intact. When he died in 1847 1847 not in 1847 inserted and boxed in the margin (1847.) inset , we began to manage manage look manage manage it ourselves. Forty years afterward, we had managed it all away except 10,000 acres, and gotten nothing to remember the sales by. About 1887—possibly it was earlier— —possibly it was earlier— —possibly it was earlier— —possibly it was earlier— the 10,000 went. My brother brother eldest brother brother found a chance to trade it for a house and lot in the town of Corry, in the oil regions of Pennsylvania. About 1894 About 1894 Three years ago About 1894 he sold this property for $250. That ended the Tennessee Land Land Land land . If any penny of cash ever came out of my father’s wise wise wise and far-seeing wise investment but tha a a a t, I have no recollection of it. No, I a a the a a m overlooking a detail. It furnished me a field for Sellers and a book. Out of my half of the book I got $15,000 or $20,000; $15,000 or $20,000; $20,000, I suppose perhaps something more; $20,000, perhaps something more; $15,000 or $20,000,; , perhaps something more; comma following ‘$20,000’ mended to a semicolon $15,000 or $20,000; out of the play I got $75,000 or $80,000 $75,000 or $80,000 $75,000 $75,000 or $80,000 $75,000 or $80,000 —just about just about just just about a dollar an acre. It is curious: curious: curious: curious; I was not alive when my father made the investment, therefore he was not intending any partiality; yet I was the only member of the family that ever profited by it. I shall have occasion to mention this land again, now and then, as I go along, for it influenced our life in one way or another during during during four deca during more than a generation. Whenever things grew dark it rose and put out its hopeful Sellers Sellers Sellaers Sellers hand and cheered us up, and said said said said, “Do not be afraid—trust in me—wait.” It kept us hoping and hoping, during forty years, and forsook us at last. It put our energies to sleep and made visionaries of us—dreamers, dreamers, dreamers, dreamers and indolent. We were always going to be rich next year—no occasion to work. It is good to begin life poor; it is good to begin life rich—these are wholesome; but to begin it it it it prospectively prospectively prospectively poor, and prospectively rich! The man who has not experienced it cannot imagine the curse curse whole size of the curse curse of it. My parents removed to Missouri in the early thirties thirties Thirties thirties ; I do not remember just when, for I was not born then, and cared nothing for such things. It was a long journey in those days, and must have been a rough and tiresome one. The home was made in the wee village of Florida, in Monroe County County county , and I was born there in 1835. The village contained a hundred people and I increased the population by 1 1 one per cent. It is more than the best the best the b the best corrected miswriting the best man in history ever did for any other any other a any other town. It may not be modest in me to refer to this, but it is true. There is no record of a person doing as much—not even Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakespeare . But I did it for Florida, and it shows that I could have done it for any place—even London, I suppose. Recently Recently Since I have been in Vienna Recently some one in Missouri has sent me a picture of the house I was born in. Heretofore Heretofore Heretofore Heretofore I have always stated that it was a palace, but I shall be more guarded, now. I ¶ I ¶ I ¶ I remember only one circumstance connected with my life in it. I remember it very well, though I was but two and a half years old at the time. The family packed up everything and started in wagons for Hannibal, on the Mississippi, thirty miles away. Toward Toward At Toward Toward night, when they camped and counted up the children, one was missing. I was the one. I had been left behind. Parents ought always to count the children before they start. I was having a good enough time playing by myself until I found that the doors were fastened and that there was a grisly deep silence brooding over the place. I knew, then, that the family were gone, and that they had forgotten me. I was well frightened, and I made all the noise I could, but no one was near and it did did did did me no good. I spent the afternoon in captivity and was not rescued till till till until the gloaming had fallen and the place was alive with ghosts. My brother Henry was six months old at that time. I used to remember his walking into a fire outdoors outdoors outdoors out doors out-doors when he was a week old. It was remarkable in me to remember a thing like that, which occurred that, which occurred that, that which occurred that, which occurred when I was so young. And it was still more remarkable that I should cling to the delusion, for thirty years, that I did did did did remember it—for of course it never happened; he would not have been able to walk at that age. If I had stopped to reflect, I should not have burdened my memory with that impossible rubbish so long. It is believed by many people that an impression deposited deposited d deposited corrected miswriting deposited in a child’s memory within the first two years of its life cannot remain there five years, but that is an error. The incident of Benvenuto Cellini and the salamander must be accepted as authentic and trustworthy; and then that remarkable and indisputable instance in the experience of Helen Keller Keller Kellar Keller —however, I will speak of that at another time. For many years I believed that I remembered helping my grandfather drink his whisky whisky whisky whiskey toddy when I was six weeks weeks years weeks weeks old, but I do not tell about that any more, now; now; now; I have lost confidence in it. now; I am grown old, and my memory is not as active as it used to be. When I was younger I could remember anything, whether it had happened had happened happened had happened or not; but my faculties are decaying, now, and soon I shall be so I cannot remember any but the latter latter latter things that happened textual note: SLC’s intended revision on the missing TS either was not inscribed, or was not interpreted, correctly: clearly he did not mean to ruin the joke by reversing the sense of his original remark. . It is sad to go to pieces like this, but we all have to do it. My uncle, John A. Quarles, was was had was was a farmer, and his place was in in out in in the country four miles from Florida. He had eight children, and fifteen or twenty negroes, and was also fortunate in other ways. Particularly ways. Particularly ways. Particularly ways; particularly in his character. I have not come across a better man than than than then man than textual note: In the top margin of MS page 37, which begins with these words, SLC wrote in pencil ‘The head-skinned partridge’. he was. I was his guest for two for two two for two or three months every year, from the fourth year after we removed to Hannibal till I was eleven or twelve years old. I have never consciously used him or his wife in a book, but his farm has come very handy to me in literature, once or twice. In In “In In “Huck Finn” and in “Tom Sawyer Detective” I moved it down to Arkansas. It was all of six hundred miles, but it was no trouble, it was not a very large farm; five hundred five hundred a thousand five hundred five hundred acres, perhaps, but I could have done it if it had been twice as large. And And And there was And as for the morality of it, I cared nothing for that; I would move a State if the exigencies of literature required it. It was a heavenly place for a boy, that farm of my my my my uncle John’s. The house was a double log one, with a spacious floor (roofed in) connecting it with the kitchen. In the summer the table table dinner table table was set in the middle of that shady and breezy floor, and the sumptuous meals—well, it makes me cry to think of them. Fried chicken; chicken; chicken; chicken, roast pig; pig; pig; pig, wild and tame wild and tame wild and tame wild and tame turkeys, ducks, ducks, ducks, ducks and and and and geese; venison just killed; squirrels, rabbits, pheasants, partridges, prairie chickens prairie chickens prairie chickens prairie-chickens ; home-made bacon and ham; hot home-made bacon and ham; hot home-made bacon and ham; hot not in textual note: The typist of the missing TS erroneously omitted one MS line of text, probably because of an eye-skip. biscuits, hot batter-cakes, hot buckwheat cakes, hot batter-cakes, hot buckwheat cakes, hot batter-cakes, hot buckwheat cakes, hot batter-cakes, hot buckwheat cakes, hot batter cakes, hot buckwheat cakes, hot “wheatbread,” “wheatbread,” “wheatbread,” “wheat bread,” hot rolls, hot corn pone corn pone corn pone corn-pone ; fresh corn corn corn, corn boiled on the ear, succotash, butter-beans, string beans string beans string beans string-beans , tomatoes, tomatoes, tomatoes, tomatoes peas peas peas pease , Irish Irish roast Irish Irish potatoes, sweet potatoes sweet potatoes sweet potatoes sweet-potatoes ; buttermilk, sweet milk, “clabber;” “clabber;” “clabber;” “clabber”; watermelons, musk melons musk melons musk melons musk-melons muskmelons musk-melons , canteloups—all fresh from the garden—apple pie, peach pie, pumpkin pie, apple dumplings, peach cobbler—I can’t remember the rest. The way that the things were cooked was perhaps the main splendor—particularly a certain few of the dishes. For instance, the corn bread corn bread corn bread cornbread , the hot biscuits biscuits rolls an biscuits biscuits and wheatbread wheatbread wheatbread wheat bread , and the fried chicken. These things have never been properly cooked in the North—in fact, no one there is able to learn the art, art, art, there, art, so far as my experience goes. The North thinks it knows how to make corn bread corn bread corn bread cornbread , but this is gross gross mere mere gross gross superstition. Perhaps no Perhaps no No Perhaps no Perhaps no bread in the world is quite as good as Southern corn bread corn bread corn bread cornbread , and perhaps no bread in the world is quite so bad bad pronounced a failure bad bad as the Northern Northern Northern Nothern imitation of it. The North seldom seldom seldom seldom tries to fry chicken chicken chicken a chicken , and this is well; the art cannot be learned north of the line of Mason and Dixon, of Mason and Dixon, of Mason and Dixon, of Mason and Dixon, nor anywhere in Europe. This is not hearsay; it is experience that is speaking. In Europe it is imagined that the custom of serving various kinds of bread blazing hot is “American,” but that is too broad a spread: spread: spread: spread; it is custom in the South, but is much less than that in the North. In the North and in Europe North and in Europe North, and in Europe North and in Europe hot bread is considered unhealthy. This is probably probably propbably canceled ‘p’ partly formed probably another fussy superstition, like the European superstition that ice-water is unhealthy. Europe does not need ice-water, and does not drink it; and yet, notwithstanding this, its word for it is better than ours, because it describes it, whereas ours doesn’t. Europe calls it “iced” water. Our word describes water made from melted ice—a drink which has a characterless taste, and which has a characterless taste, and which has a characterless taste, and not in words probably omitted by an NAR editor to prevent an undesirable short line at the top of the next page which we have have do not have have but little acquaintance with. It seems a pity that the world should throw away so many good things merely because they are unwholesome. I doubt if God has given us any refreshment which, taken in moderation, is unwholesome, except microbes. Yet there are people who strictly deprive themselves of each and each and each and each and every eatable, drinkable and smokable which has in any way acquired a shady reputation. They pay this price for health. And health is all they get for it. it. it. They have told me so themselves. it. How strange it is; it is like paying out your whole fortune for a cow that has gone dry. The farm-house farm-house farm-house farmhouse stood in the middle of a very large yard, and the yard was fenced on three sides with rails and on the rear side with high palings; against these stood the smoke-house; against . . . smoke-house; against . . . smoke-house; against . . . smoke-house; against . . . smokehouse; beyond the palings was the orchard, orchard, orchard, orchard; beyond the orchard were were lay were were the negro quarter and the the the ‖ the the tobacco fields tobacco fields tobacco fields tobacco-fields . The The Outside The The front yard was entered over a stile, made of sawed-off logs of graduated heights; I do not remember any gate. In a corner of the front yard were a dozen lofty hickory trees hickory trees hickory trees hickory-trees and a dozen black walnuts black walnuts black walnuts black-walnuts , and in the nutting season riches were to be gathered there. Down a piece, abreast the house, stood a little log cabin against the rail fence; and there the woody hill fell sharply away, past the barns, the corn-crib corn-crib corn-crib corn-crib corncrib , the stables and stables and stables, and stables and the tobacco-curing house, to a limpid brook which sang along over its gravelly bed and curved and frisked in and out and here and there and yonder in the deep shade of overhanging foliage and vines—a divine place for wading, and it had swimming-pools, too, which which as much as breast deep which which were forbidden to us and therefore and therefore and and therefore much frequented by us. frequented by us. used. frequented. by us. period deleted, and ‘by us.’ inserted, in pencil frequented by us. For we were little Christian children, and had early been taught the value of forbidden fruit. For . . . fruit. not in For . . . fruit. In the little log cabin lived a bedridden bedridden bed-ridden bed-ridden bedridden white-headed slave woman whom whom whome whom we visited daily, and looked upon with awe, for we believed she was upwards upwards upwards upward of a thousand years old and had talked with Moses. The younger negroes credited these statistics, and had furnished them to us in good faith. We accommodated all the details which came to us about her; and so we believed that she had lost her health in the long desert-trip desert-trip desert-trip desert-trip desert trip coming out of Egypt, and had never been able to get it back again. She had a round round round round bald place on the crown crown back crown crown of her head, and we used to creep around and gaze at it in reverent in reverent reverentially in reverent in reverent silence, and reflect that it was caused by fright through seeing Pharaoh drowned. We called her “Aunt” Hannah, “Aunt” Hannah, “Aunt” A Hannah,” “Aunt” Hannah, Southern Southern southern Southern fashion. She was superstitious like the other other others other negroes; also, like them, she was deeply religious. Like them, she had great faith in prayer, and employed it it it it in all ordinary exigencies, but not in cases where where where delay where a dead certainty of result was urgent. Whenever witches were around she tied up the remnant of her wool in little tufts, with white thread, and this promptly made the witches the witches them witches the witches impotent. All the negroes were friends of ours, and with those of our own age we were in effect comrades. I say say say, say in effect, using the phrase as a modification. We were comrades, and yet not comrades; color and condition and condition and condition and condition interposed a subtle line which both parties were conscious of, and which rendered complete fusion impossible. We had a faithful and affectionate good friend, ally and adviser adviser helper adviser adviser in “Uncle Dan’l,” a middle-aged slave whose head was the best one in the negro-quarter negro-quarter negro-quarter negro-quarter negro quarter , whose sympathies were wide and warm, and whose heart was honest and simple and knew no guile. He has served me well, these many, many years. I have not seen him for more than half more than half half more than half a century, and yet yet yet he yet spiritually I have had his welcome company a good part of that time, and have staged him in books books books and carted him all around books under his own name and as “Jim,” and carted him all around—to Hannibal, down the Mississippi on a raft, and even down . . . even to Arkansas, and even down . . . even down . . . even across the Desert of Sahara in a balloon—and he has endured it all with the patience and friendliness and loyalty which were his birthright. It was on the farm that I got my strong liking strong liking fondness strong liking strong liking for his race and my appreciation of certain of its fine qualities. This feeling and this estimate have stood the test of sixty years and more sixty years and more fifty years sixty years and more sixty years and more, and have suffered no no no ni impairment. The black face is as welcome to me now as it was then. In my schoolboy schoolboy schoolboy school-boy days I had no aversion to slavery. I was not aware that there was anything wrong about it. No one arraigned arraigned said arraigned arraigned it in my hearing; the local papers said nothing against it; the local pulpit taught us that God approved it, that it was a holy thing, and that the doubter need only look look look look in the Bible if if if is he wished to settle his mind—and then the texts were read aloud to us to make the matter sure; if the slaves themselves had an aversion to slavery an aversion to slavery a different opinion an aversion to slavery an aversion to slavery they were wise and said said kept it to themselves said said nothing. In Hannibal we seldom saw a slave misused; on the farm, never. farm, never. textual note: In the top margin of the MS page 47, which begins with these words, SLC wrote in pencil ‘Bombay’. There was, however, one small incident of my boyhood days which touched this matter, and it must have meant a good deal to me or it would not have stayed in my memory, clear and sharp, vivid and shadowless, all these slow-drifting slow-drifting fifty slow-drifting years. We had a little slave boy whom we had hired from some one, there in Hannibal. He was from the Eastern Shore of Maryland, and had been brought away from his family and his friends, half way half way half way half-way across the American continent, and sold. He was a cheery spirit, innocent and gentle, and the noisiest creature that ever was, perhaps. All day long he was singing, singing, singing, singing, whistling, yelling, whooping, laughing—it was maddening, devastating, unendurable. At last, one day, I lost all my temper, and went raging raging raging raging to my mother, and said Sandy had been singing for an hour without a single break, and I couldn’t stand it, and wouldn’t she please shut him up. The tears came into her eyes, and her lip lip l◇ lip corrected miswriting lip trembled, and she said something like this— said something like this— said— ¶ “ something like this— said something like this— “Poor thing, when he sings, it shows that he is not remembering, and that comforts me; but when he is still, I am afraid he is thinking, and I cannot bear it. He will never see his mother again; if he can sing, I must must will must heavily canceled; doubtful must not hinder it, but be thankful for it. If you were older, older, old,er, older, you would understand me; then that friendless child’s noise would make you glad glad gld glad corrected miswriting glad .” It was a simple speech, and made up of small words, but it went home, and Sandy’s noise was not a trouble to me any more. She never used large words, but but bu but corrected miswriting but she had a natural gift for making small ones do effective effective effective good effective effective work. She lived to reach the neighborhood of ninety years, and was capable with her tongue to the last—especially when a meanness or an injustice roused her spirit. She has come handy to me several times in my books, where she figures as Tom Tom “Aun Tom Tom Sawyer’s “Aunt Polly.” Polly.” Polly.” I fur Polly.” I fitted her out with a dialect, and tried to think up other improvements for her, but did not find any. I used Sandy once, also; it was in “Tom Sawyer;” Sawyer;” Sawyer;” Sawyer”; I tried I tried tried I tried to get him to whitewash the fence, but it did not work. I do not remember what name I called him by in the book. I can see the farm yet, with perfect clearness. I can see all its belongings, all its details: details: details: details; the family room of the house, with a “trundle” bed in one corner and a spinning-wheel in another—a wheel whose rising and falling rising and falling rising and swelling and diminishing rising and falling rising and falling wail, heard from a distance, was the mournfulest of all sounds to me, and made me homesick and low-spirited, and filled filled low filled filled my atmosphere with the wandering spirits of the dead; the vast fireplace fireplace fire-place fireplace , piled high, on winter nights, with flaming hickory logs from whose ends a sugary sap bubbled out but did not go to waste, for we scraped it off and ate it; the lazy cat spread out on the rough hearthstones hearthstones hearth-stones hearth-stones hearthstones , the drowsy dogs braced against the jambs and blinking; my my my muy corrected in blue pencil aunt in one chimney corner chimney corner chimney corner chimney-corner knitting, my uncle in the other smoking his corn-cob pipe; the slick and carpetless oak oak oak floor freckled with black indentations oak floor faintly mirroring the dancing flame-tongues and freckled with black indentations where fire-coals had popped out and died a leisurely leisurely lieeisurely leisurely death; half a dozen children romping in the background background background; background twilight; “split”-bottomed chairs here and there, some with rockers; a cradle—out of service, but waiting, with confidence; in the early cold mornings a snuggle of children, in shirts and chemises, occupying the hearthstone hearthstone hearthstone hearth-stone and procrastinating procrastinating procrastinating procrastinating —they could not bear to leave that comfortable place and go out on the wind-swept floor-space floor-space floor-space floor-space between house and kitchen where the general tin basin stood stood stood on a bench stood , and wash. Along outside of the front fence ran the country road; dusty in the summertime summertime summertime summer-time , and a good place for snakes—they liked to lie in it and sun themselves; when they were rattlesnakes or puff adders, we killed them; when they were black snakes, or racers, or belonged to the fabled “hoop” breed, we fled, without shame; when they were “house-snakes” “house-snakes” “house-snakes” “house-snakes” or “garters” we carried them home and put them in Aunt Patsy’s work-basket for a surprise; for she was prejudiced against snakes, and always when she took the basket in her lap and they began to climb out of it it disordered her mind. She never could seem to get used to them; her opportunities went for nothing. And she was always cold cold distant cold cold toward bats, too, and could not bear them; them; them; and yet a bat is them; and yet I think a bat is as friendly a bird as there is. My mother was Aunt Patsy’s Aunt Patsy’s her aunt Patsy’s Aunt Patsy’s sister, and had the same wild wild wild wild superstitions. A bat is beautifully soft and silky; I do not know any creature that is pleasanter to the touch, or is more grateful for caressings, if offered in the right spirit. I know all about these coleoptera, because our great cave, three miles below Hannibal, was multitudinously stocked with multitudinously stocked with full of multitudinously stocked with them, and often I brought them home to amuse my mother with. It was easy to manage if it was a school day school day school-day school-day school day , because then I had ostensibly been to school and hadn’t any bats. She was not a suspicious person, but full of trust and confidence; and when I said “There’s something in my coat-pocket coat-pocket coat-pocket coat pocket for you,” she would put her hand in. But she always took it out again, herself; I didn’t have to tell her. It was remarkable, the way she couldn’t couldn’t could not couldn’t learn to like private bats. The more experience she had, the more she could not change her views. The . . . views. The . . . views. not in sentence probably omitted by an NAR editor to prevent an undesirable short line at the top of the next page I think she was never in the cave in her life; but everybody else went there. Many excursion-parties excursion-parties excursion-parties excursion parties came from considerable distances up and down the river to visit the cave. It was miles in extent, and was a tangled wilderness of narrow and lofty clefts and passages. It was an easy place to get lost in; anybody could do it—including the bats. I got lost in it myself, along with a lady, and our last candle burned down to almost nothing before we glimpsed glimpsed glimpsed glim psed marked to remove space in blue pencil; SLC wrote ‘tr’ in the margin the search-party’s lights winding about in the distance. “Injun Joe” the half-breed got lost in there once, and would have starved to death if the bats had run short. But there was no chance of that; there were myriads of them. He told me all his story. He . . . story. He . . . story. He . . . story. In the the a the book called “Tom Sawyer” I starved him entirely to death in the cave, death in the cave, death, in the cave, death in the cave, but that was in the interest of art; it never happened. “General” Gaines, who was our first town-drunkard town-drunkard town-drunkard town-drunkard town-drunkard town drunkard before Jimmy Finn got the place, was lost in there for the space of a week, and finally pushed his handkerchief out of a hole in a hilltop near Saverton, several several four several miles down the river from the cave’s mouth, and somebody saw it and dug him out. There is nothing the matter with his statistics except the handkerchief. I knew him for years, and he he I know he he he hadn’t any. But it could have been his nose. That would attract attention. The cave was an uncanny uncanny uncanyny uncanny place, for it contained a corpse—the corpse of a young girl of fourteen. It was in a glass cylinder enclosed in a copper one which was suspended from a rail which bridged a narrow passage. The body was preserved in alcohol, and it was said that it was said that it was said that it was said that loafers and rowdies used to drag it up by the hair and look at the dead face. The girl was the daughter of a St. Louis surgeon of extraordinary extraordinary wonderful extraordinary extraordinary ability and wide celebrity. He was an eccentric man, man, man, man and did many strange things. He put the poor thing in that forlorn place himself. The . . . himself. The . . . himself. queried by Paine, then bracketed by SLC, who wrote ‘omit this ¶’ in the margin The . . . himself. not in He was He was He was He * * * Dr. McDowell—the great Dr. McDowell, of St. Louis— was in the margin next to this paragraph SLC wrote, ‘Omit to the end of the chapter if you want to shorten the instalment’; he drew a line in the margin from here to ‘Civil War.’ at 31.8 . . . Dr. McDowell—the great Dr. McDowell, of St. Louis—was deleted in blue pencil not in a physician as well as a surgeon; and sometimes in cases where medicines failed failed had failed failed to save, he developed other resources. He fell out, once, with a family family fanimily family whose physician he was, and after that they ceased to employ him. But a a I a a time came when he was once more called. The lady of the house was very ill, and had been given up by her her the her her doctors. He came into the room and stopped, and stood still, and looked around upon the scene; he had his great slouch hat on, and a quarter of an acre of gingerbread under his arm, and while he looked meditatively about, he broke hunks from his cake, munched them, and let the crumbs dribble down his breast to the floor. The lady lay pale and still, with her eyes closed; about the bed, in the solemn hush, were grouped the family softly sobbing, some standing, some kneeling. Presently the doctor began to take up the medicine bottles and sniff at them contemptuously and throw them out of the open window. When they were all gone he ranged up to the bed, laid his slab of gingerbread gingerbread ginger-bread gingerbread on the dying woman’s breast, and said roughly— “What are you idiots sniveling about?—there’s nothing the matter with this humbug. Put out your tongue!” The sobbings stopped and the angry mourners changed their attitudes and began to upbraid the doctor for for for for for his cruel cruel extraor cruel cruel behavior behavior behavior behaviour in this chamber of death; but he interrupted them with an explosion of profane abuse abuse abusse abuse , and said— “A pack of snuffling fat-wits, do you think you can teach me my my my any my corrected in blue pencil business? I tell you there is nothing the matter with the the thise the woman—nothing the matter but laziness. laziness. laziness. laziness. corrected in blue pencil What she wants is a beefsteak and a washtub. With her damned society training society training society training society-training , she—” Then the dying woman rose up up up, up in bed, and the light of battle was in her her her, her eye. She poured out upon the doctor her whole insulted mind—just a volcanic irruption, accompanied by accompanied by with accompanied by accompanied by thunder and lightning, whirlwinds and earthquakes, whirlwinds and earthquakes, whirlwinds and earthquakes, whirlwinds and earthquakes, pumice stone and ashes. It brought the reaction which he was after, and she got well. This was the lamented Dr. McDowell, whose name was so great and so honored in the Mississippi Valley a decade before the Civil War. a physician . . . This was the lamented Dr. McDowell, whose name was so great and so honored in the Mississippi Valley a decade before the Civil War. a physician . . . This was the lamented Dr. McDowell. a physician . . . This was the lamented Dr. McDowell. a physician . . . This was the lamented Dr. McDowell., whose name was so great and so honored in the Mississippi Valley a decade before the Civil War. written in the margin next to the last paragraph of the passage: ‘Omit to here, if you want to shorten the instalment. SLC’ a physician . . . This was the lamented Dr. McDowell, whose name was so great and so honored in the Mississippi Valley a decade before the Civil War. deleted in blue pencil; written in the margin in blue pencil next to the last paragraph of the passage: ‘Please remove this & send it to me. There’s a plenty without it.’; and at the top of the next page of proof: ‘Please remove this crossed-out ¶ & return it to me just as it is. It is out of place here: I will use it some other time. SLC’ not in note that in the entries through 30.7, the readings in NAR 13pf are not represented as canceled Chapter Beyond Chapter ¶ Beyond Chapter triple rule ¶ Beyond Chapter ¶ Beyond CHAPTER ? ¶ Beyond ¶ Beyond the road where the snakes sunned themselves was a dense young thicket, and through it a dim-lighted path led a quarter of a mile of a mile of mile of a mile ; then out of the dimness one emerged abruptly upon a level great prairie which was covered with wild strawberry plants strawberry plants strawberry plants strawberry-plants , vividly starred with prairie pinks, and walled in on all sides by forests. The strawberries were fragrant and fine, and in the season we were generally there in the crisp freshness of the early morning, while the dew-beads still sparkled upon the grass and the woods were were were were ringing with with with with with the first songs of the birds. Down the forest-slopes forest-slopes forest-slopes forest slopes to the left were the swings. They were made of bark stripped from hickory saplings. When they became became grew became became dry they were dangerous. They usually broke when a child was forty feet in the air, and this was why so many bones had to be mended every year. I had no ill luck ill luck ill luck ill-luck myself, but but byut but none none my none none of my cousins escaped. There were eight of them, and at one time and another they broke fourteen arms among them. But it cost next to nothing, for the doctor worked by the year—$25 $25 $25 $25. for the whole family. I remember two of the Florida doctors, Chowning and Meredith. They not only tended an entire family for $25 $25 $25 $25. a year, but furnished the medicines themselves. Good measure, too. Only the largest persons could hold a whole dose. Castor oil Castor oil Castor oil Castor-oil was the principal beverage. The dose was half a dipperful, with dipperful, with dipper- dipperful,, and with the comma deleted and then apparently reinstated dipperful, with half a dipperful of New Orleans molasses added added added added to help it down and make it taste good, which it never did. The next stand-by stand-by stand-by standby was calomel; the next, rhubarb; and the next, jalap. jalap. jalop. jalap. ‸ jalap. Then they bled the patient, and put mustard plasters mustard plasters mustard plasters mustard-plasters on him. It was a dreadful system, and yet the death-rate was not heavy. The calomel was nearly sure to salivate the patient and cost him some of his teeth. There were no dentists. When teeth became touched with decay or were otherwise ailing, the doctor knew of but one thing to do: he fetched his tongs and dragged them out. If the jaw remained, it was not his fault. Doctors ¶ Doctors no ¶ Doctors ¶ Doctors ¶ Doctors were not called, in cases of ordinary illness; the family’s family’s family’s family grandmother attended to those. Every old woman was a doctor, and gathered her own medicines in the woods, and knew how to compound doses that would stir the vitals of a cast-iron dog. And then there was the “Indian doctor;” doctor;” doctor;” doctor”; a grave savage, remnant of his tribe, deeply read in the mysteries of nature and the secret properties of herbs; and most backwoodsmen had high faith in his powers and could tell of wonderful cures achieved by him. In Mauritius, away off yonder in the solitudes of the Indian Indian Indian Indian ocean ocean ocean Ocean , there is a person who answers to our Indian doctor of the old times. He is a negro, and has had no teaching as a doctor, yet there is one disease which he is master of and can cure, and the doctors doctors white doctors doctors can’t. They send for him when they have a case. It is a child’s disease of a strange and deadly sort, and the negro cures it with a herb-medicine herb-medicine herb-medicine herb medicine which he makes, himself, from a prescription which has come down to him from his father and grandfather. He will not let any one see it. He keeps the secret of its components to himself, and it is feared that he will die without divulging it; then there will be consternation in Mauritius. I was told these things by the people there, in 1896 there, in 1896 there there, in 1896 . We had the “faith-doctor,” “faith-doctor,” “faith-doctor,” “faith-doctor,” “faith doctor,” too, in those early days—a woman. days—a woman. days.—a woman. days—a woman. Her specialty was tooth-ache tooth-ache tooth-ache toothache . She was a farmer’s old wife, and lived five miles from Hannibal. She would lay her hand on the patient’s jaw and say “Believe!” and the cure was prompt. Mrs. Utterback. I remember her very well. Twice I rode out there behind my mother, horseback, and saw the cure performed. My mother was the patient. My . . . patient. My . . . patient. My . . . patient. Dr. Dr. Dr. Dr. Meredith removed to Hannibal, by and by, and was our family physician there, and saved my life several times. Still, he was a good man and meant well. Let it go. I was always told that I was a sickly and precarious and tiresome and uncertain and tiresome and uncertain and tiresome and uncertain and tiresome and uncertain child, and lived mainly on allopathic medicines during the first seven years of my life. I asked my mother about this, in her old age—she was in her eighty-eighth eighty-eighth 88th eighty-eighth 88th year—and said: “I suppose that during all that time you were uneasy about me?” “Yes, the whole time.” “Afraid I wouldn’t live? live? live. live? ” After a reflective pause—ostensibly to think out the facts— “No—afraid you would.” I . . . would.” I . . . would.” inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over I . . . would.” It sounds like a plagiarism, but it probably wasn’t. The ¶ It . . . wasn’t. ¶ The ¶ The It . . . wasn’t. ¶ The insertion created ambiguous paragraphing ¶ It . . . wasn’t. The country schoolhouse schoolhouse schoolhouse school-house was three miles from my uncle’s farm. It stood in a clearing in the woods, and would hold about twenty-five boys and girls. We attended the school with more or less regularity once or twice a week, in summer, walking to it in the cool of the morning by the forest paths paths road paths , and back in the gloaming at the end of the day. All the pupils brought their dinners in baskets—corn dodger corn dodger corn dodger corn-dodger , buttermilk and other good things—and sat in the shade of the trees at noon and ate them. It is the part of my education which I look back upon with the the the the most satisfaction. My first visit to the school was when I was seven. A strapping girl of fifteen, in the customary sunbonnet and calico dress, asked me if I “used tobacco”—meaning did I chew it. I said, no. It roused her scorn. She reported me to all the crowd, and said— “Here is a boy seven years old who can’t chaw chaw chew cheaw chaw tobacco.” By the looks and comments which this produced, I realized realized recog realized realized that I was a degraded object; I was object; I was object, and I was object, and was object, and; Iwas semicolon mended from a comma object; I was cruelly ashamed of myself. I determined to reform. But I only made myself sick; I was not able to learn to chew tobacco. I learned to smoke fairly well, but that did not conciliate anybody, and I remained a poor thing, and characterless. I longed to be respected, but I never was never was was never never was able to rise. Children have but little charity charity charity ◇ charity for each other’s defects. As I have said, I spent some part of every year at the farm until I was twelve or thirteen years old twelve or thirteen years old textual note: In the top margin of MS page 66, which contains these words, SLC wrote ‘See back—“11 or 12 yr old” ’, evidently intending to resolve the inconsistency with the text at 18.4, where he had written, ‘till I was eleven or twelve years old’; in the top margin of the same page, he wrote ‘maple-sugar’, anticipating the description of making sugar at 35.13–16, which occurs on MS page 68. . The life which I led there with my cousins was full of charm, and so is the memory of it yet. I can call back the solemn twilight and mystery of the deep woods, the earthy smells, the faint odors of the wild flowers, the sheen of rain-washed foliage, the rattling clatter of drops when the wind shook the trees, the far-off far-off glimpses of scurrying wild things far-off far-off hammering of wood-peckers wood-peckers wood-peckers woodpeckers wood-peckers and the the the the muffled drumming of wood-pheasants in the remotenesses remotenesses deep remotenesses remotenesses remoteness of the forest, the snap-shot glimpses of disturbed wild creatures skurrying skurrying skurrying scurrying through the grass,—I can call it all back and make it as real as it ever was, and as blessed. I can call back the prairie, and its loneliness and peace, and a vast hawk hanging motionless in the sky, with his wings spread wide and the blue of the vault showing through the fringe of their end-feathers. I can see the woods in their autumn dress, the oaks purple, the hickories washed with gold, the maples and the sumachs and the sumachs and the sumachs and the sumacs luminous with crimson fires, and I can hear the rustle made by the fallen leaves as we plowed through them. I can see the blue clusters of wild grapes wild grapes textual note: In the top margin of MS page 67, which contains these words, SLC wrote, ‘grapes’. hanging amongst the foliage of the saplings, and I remember the taste of them and the smell. I know how the wild blackberries looked, and how they tasted; and the same with the pawpaws, the hazelnuts and the persimmons; and I can feel the thumping rain, rain, rain, rain, upon my head, of hickory nuts hickory nuts hickory nuts hickory-nuts and walnuts when we were out in the frosty dawns dawns dawns dawn to scramble for them with the pigs, and the gusts of wind loosed them and sent them down. I know the stain of blackberries, and how pretty it is; and I know the stain of walnut hulls, and how little it minds soap and water; also what grudged grudged stingy grudged grudged experience it had of either of them. I know the taste of maple sap, and when to gather it, and how to arrange the troughs and the delivery-tubes delivery-tubes delivery-tubes delivery tubes , and how to boil down the juice, and how to hook the sugar after it is made; also how much better hooked sugar tastes than any that is honestly come by, let bigots say what they will. I know know know the luscious know how a prize watermelon looks when it is sunning its fat rotundity among pumpkin vines and “simblins;” “simblins;” “simblins;” “simblins”; I know how to tell when it is ripe without “plugging” it; I know how inviting inviting cool and inviting inviting it looks when it is cooling itself in a tub of water under the bed, waiting; I know how it looks when it lies on the table in the sheltered great floor-space between house and kitchen, and the children gathered for the sacrifice and their mouths watering; I know the crackling sound it makes when the carving knife carving knife carving knife carving-knife enters its end, and I can see the split fly along in front of the blade as the knife cleaves its way to the other end; I can see its halves fall apart and display the rich red meat meat meat, meat and the black seeds, and the heart standing up, a luxury fit for the elect; I know how a boy looks, behind a yard-long slice of that melon, and I know how he feels; for I have been there. I know the taste of the watermelon which has been honestly come by, and I know the taste of the watermelon which has been acquired by art. Both taste good, but the experienced know which tastes best. I know the look of green apples and peaches and pears on the trees, and I know how how how how how entertaining they are when they are inside of a person. I know how ripe ones look when they are piled in pyramids under the trees, and how pretty they are and how vivid their colors. I know how a frozen frozen froste frozen frozen apple looks, in a barrel down cellar in the winter time winter time winter time winter-time , and how hard it is to bite, and how the the its the frost makes the teeth ache, and yet how good it is, notwithstanding. I know the disposition of elderly people to select the specked apples for the children, and I once knew ways to beat the game. I know the look of an apple that is roasting apple that is roasting textual note: In the top margin of MS page 70, which contains these words, SLC wrote in pencil ‘Florence roast-apples’. and sizzling on a hearth on a winter’s evening, and I know the comfort that comes of eating it hot, along with some sugar and a drench of cream. I know the delicate art and mystery of so cracking hickory nuts hickory nuts hickorynuts hickory nuts hickory-nuts and walnuts on a flatiron with a hammer that the kernels will be delivered whole, and I know how the nuts, nuts, nuts, combined with nuts, taken in conjunction with winter apples, cider cider cider, cider and doughnuts, make old people’s old tales old tales old tales tales and old jokes sound fresh and crisp and enchanting, and juggle an evening away before you know what went with the time. I know the look of Uncle Uncle uncle Uncle Dan’l’s kitchen as it was on privileged nights when I was a child nights when I was a child nights fifty years ago nights when I was a child nights, when I was a child , and I can I can can I can see the white and black children grouped on the hearth, with the firelight firelight fire-light firelight playing on on upon on their faces and the shadows flickering upon the walls, clear back toward the cavernous gloom of the rear, and I can hear Uncle Dan’l telling the immortal tales which Uncle Remus Harris was to gather into his book book book booksrevised in pencil books and charm the world with, by and by; and I can I can I can I can feel again the creepy joy which quivered through me when the time for the ghost story of the “Golden Arm” “Golden Arm” textual note: In the top margin of MS page 71, which contains these words, SLC wrote in pencil ‘Golden Arm’. ghost story of the “Golden Arm” ghost story ghost story of the “Golden Arm” ghost story of the “Golden Arm” ghost-story of the “Golden Arm” was reached—and the sense of regret, too, which came over me, for it was always the last story of the evening, and there was nothing between it and the unwelcome bed. I can remember the bare wooden stairway in my uncle’s house, in my uncle’s house, in my uncle’s house, in my uncle’s house, and the turn to the left above the landing, and the rafters and the slanting roof roof roof roof, over my my the my my bed, and the squares of moonlight on the floor, and the white cold world of snow outside, seen through the curtainless window. I can remember the howling howling little heaps of powdery snow howling howling of the wind and the quaking of the house on stormy nights nights nights nights , and how snug and cosy cosy cosy cozy one felt, under the blankets, listening; listening; listening; listening, and how the powdery snow used to sift in, around the sashes, and lie in little ridges on the floor, and make the place look chilly in the morning, and curb the wild desire to get up—in case there was any. I can remember how very dark that room was, in the dark of the moon, and how packed it was with ghostly stillness when one woke up by accident away in the night, and forgotten sins came flocking out of the secret chambers of the memory and wanted a hearing; and how ill chosen the time seemed for this kind of business; and how dismal was the hoo-hooing of the owl and the wailing of the wolf, sent mourning by on the night wind. I remember the raging of the rain on that roof, summer nights, and how pleasant it was to lie and lie and lie and lie and listen to it, and enjoy the white splendor of the lightning and the majestic booming and crashing of the thunder. It was a very satisfactory room; and there was a lightning rod lightning rod lightning rod lightning-rod which was reachable from the window, an adorable and skittish thing to climb up and down, summer nights, when there were duties on hand of a sort to make privacy desirable. I remember the ’coon ’coon coon ’coon and ’possum-hunts ’possum-hunts ’possum-hunts ’possom hunts , nights, with the negroes, and the long marches through the black gloom of the woods, and the excitement which fired everybody when the distant bay of an experienced of an experienced textual note: In the top margin of MS page 74, which begins with these words, SLC wrote ‘house-raising’. dog announced that the game was treed; then the wild scramblings and stumblings through briars and bushes and over roots to get to the spot; then the lighting of a fire and the felling of the tree, the joyful frenzy of the dogs and the negroes, and the weird weird wierd weird picture it all made in the red glare in the red glare in the red glare in the red glare —I remember it all well, and the delight that every one got out of it, except except except except perhaps the ’coon ’coon coon ’coon . I remember the pigeon seasons pigeon seasons textual note: These words occur on MS page 74; in the top margin of MS page 73 SLC wrote ‘pigeon-roost’. , when the birds would come in millions, and cover the trees, and by their weight break down the branches. They were clubbed to death with sticks; guns were not necessary, and were not not not not used. I remember the squirrel-hunts squirrel-hunts squirrel-hunts squirrel-hunts squirrel hunts , and prairie-chicken prairie-chicken prairie-chicken prairie-chicken the prairie-chicken hunts, and wild turkey wild turkey wild turkey the wild turkey the wild-turkey hunts, and all that; and how we turned out, mornings, while it was still dark, to go on these expeditions, and how chilly and dismal it was, and how often I regretted that I was well enough to go. go. go,. go. A toot on a tin horn brought twice twice three times twice as many dogs as were needed, and in their happiness they raced and scampered about, and knocked small people down, and made no end of unnecessary noise. At the word, they vanished vanished van- vanished rewritten for clarity vanished away toward the woods, and we drifted silently after them in the melancholy gloom. But presently the gray dawn stole over the world, the birds piped up, then the sun rose and poured light and comfort all around, everything was was wash was fresh and dewy and fragrant, and life was a boon again. After three hours of tramping we arrived back back back hungry back wholesomely tired, overladen with game, very very and very very hungry, and just in time for breakfast. breakfast. textual note: This word ends MS page 75, the last one written on buff-colored paper. MS page 76 and those following were written on white paper (see Source documents). At the top of MS page 76, SLC wrote the following list, in three columns: mock Duel stolen watermelon Prince Wales—Gen Grant. Spoil Whittier’s 70th birth-day (or Longfellow’s?) Bishop. Ch. W. Stoddard. Harte. Parkman Jas. Parton. Cholera Man butchered & left for me to discover. Ed Hyde try kill uncle Sam Brown Blackburn. Dr. Fife Chapultepec— destroyed extras. Mrs. Horr—5 yr Newcomb—Torry Down Dick Hardy’s stable. Burning of calaboose shooting of Cal. emigrant & old Smarr Col. Elgin—McDonald Ch. Snyder Dr. Peake. Nevada duel. Lt in war. Uncle Tom Cabin ’53 Cat—read 3 Spaniards. Chapter My Chapter ¶ My new page Chapter double rule ¶ My Chapter My Chapter. single rule canceled centered Hunting the prai Deceitful Turkey centered By Mark Twain When I was a boy ¶ My Munro deleted ‘Chapter.’ and inserted the title and the opening words; Harvey inserted the author’s name centered Hunting the Deceitful Turkey centered BY MARK TWAIN flush left When I was a boy my uncle and his big boys hunted with the rifle, the youngest boy boy boy boy Fred boy Fred and I with a shot-gun—a small small small, light, small single-barrelled shot-gun shot-gun shot-gun shotgun which was properly suited to our size and strength; it was not much heavier than a broom. We carried it turn-about turn-about turn-about turn about , half an hour at a time. I was not able to hit anything with it, but I liked to try. Fred and I hunted feathered small game, the others hunted deer, squirrels, squirrels, squirrels, squirrels, wild turkeys, and such things. Jim and his father were the best shots. Jim . . . shots. Jim . . . shots. Jim . . . shots. circled in pencil My uncle and the big boys were good shots. They killed hawks and wild geese and such-like such-like such-like such like on the wing; and they didn’t wound or kill squirrels, they stunned stunned stuned stunned stunned them. When the dogs treed a squirrel, the squirrel would scamper aloft aloft high aloft aloft and run out on a limb and flatten himself along it it it it, hoping to make himself invisible in that way—and not quite succeeding. You could see his wee little ears sticking up. You couldn’t see his nose, but you knew where it was. Then the hunter, despising a “rest” for his rifle, stood up and took off-hand off-hand off-hand off-hand offhand aim at the limb and sent a bullet into it immediately under the squirrel’s nose, and down tumbled the animal, unwounded but unconscious; the dogs gave him a shake and he was dead. Sometimes when the distance was great and the wind not accurately allowed for, the bullet would hit the squirrel’s head; the dogs could do as they pleased with that one—the hunter’s pride was hurt, and he wouldn’t allow it to go into the game-bag. In the first faint gray of the dawn the stately wild turkeys would be stalking around in great flocks, and ready to be sociable and answer invitations to come and converse with other excursionists of their kind. The hunter concealed himself and imitated the turkey-call by sucking the air through the leg-bone of a turkey which had previously answered a call a call an invitation a call like that and lived only just long enough to regret it. There is nothing that furnishes a perfect perfect perfect imitation of the perfect turkey-call except that bone. Another of Nature’s treacheries treacheries countless treacheries treacheries , you see; she see; she see; she see. She see, she is full of them; them; them; she would rather them; half the time she doesn’t know which she likes best—to betray her child or protect it. In the case of the turkey she is badly mixed: she gives it a bone to be used used used against used in getting it into trouble, and she also furnishes it with a trick for getting itself out of the trouble again. When a mamma-turkey answers an invitation and finds finds finds that finds she has made a mistake in accepting it, she does as the mamma-partridge does—remembers a previous engagement and goes limping and scrambling away, pretending to be very lame; and at the same time she is saying to her not-visible children, “Lie low, keep still, don’t expose yourselves; I shall be back as soon as I have beguiled this shabby swindler out of the county county county country .” When a person is ignorant and confiding, this immoral immoral dishonorable immoral device can have tiresome results. I followed an ostensibly lame turkey over a considerable part of the United States one morning, because I believed in her and could not think she would deceive a mere boy, and one who was trusting her and considering her honest. I had the single-barrelled single-barrelled single-barreled single-barrelled shot-gun shot-gun shotgun shot-gun , but my idea was to catch her alive. I often got within rushing distance of her, and then made my rush; but always, just as I made my final plunge and put my hand down where where exactly where where her back had been had been was had been , it wasn’t there; it was only two or three inches from there and I brushed the tail feathers tail feathers tail feathers tail-feathers as I landed on my stomach—a very close call, but still not quite close enough; that is, not close enough for success, but just close enough to convince me that that that she would change ownership next that I could do it next time. She always waited for me, a little piece away, and let on to be resting and greatly fatigued; which was a lie, but I believed it, for I still thought her honest long after I ought to have begun to doubt her, long after I ought to have been suspecting long . . . suspecting long . . . suspecting the typist of the missing TS erroneously omitted one MS line of text, probably because of an eye-skip suspecting that this was no way for a high-minded bird to be acting. I followed, and followed and and followed and and followed and and followed, and and followed, and followed, making my periodical rushes, and getting up and brushing the dust off, and resuming the voyage with patient patient patience corrected to ‘patient’ in pencil, probably not by SLC patient confidence; indeed indeed indeed indeed, with a confidence which grew, for I could see by the change of climate and vegetation that we were getting up into the high latitudes, and as she always looked a little tireder and a little more discouraged after each rush, I judged that I was safe to win, in the end, end, end, the result end, end, the competition being purely a matter of staying power and the advantage lying with me from the start the start the start the start because she was lame. Along in the afternoon I began to feel fatigued myself. Neither of us had had any rest rest real rest rest since we first started on the excursion, which was upwards of ten hours hours hours hourse corrected to ‘hours’ in pencil, probably not by SLC before, though latterly we had paused a while a while a while awhile after rushes, I letting on to be thinking about something, and she letting on to be thinking about something something, . . . something something, . . . something not in the typist of the missing TS apparently omitted nine words of MS text because of an eyeskip else; but neither of us sincere, and both of us waiting for the other to call game but in no real hurry about it, for indeed those little evanescent snatches of rest were very grateful to the feelings of us both, both, both, both; it would naturally be so, skirmishing along like that ever since dawn and not a bite in the meantime meantime meantime mean time ; at least for me, though sometimes as she lay on her side fanning herself with a wing and praying for strength to get out of this difficulty a grasshopper happened along whose time had come, and that was well for her, and fortunate, but I had nothing—nothing the whole day. More than once, after I was very tired, I gave up taking her alive, and was going to shoot her, but I never did it, although it was my right, for I did not believe I could hit her; and besides, she always stopped and posed, when I raised the gun, and this made me suspicious that she knew about me and my marksmanship me and my marksmanship me me and my marksmanship , and so I did not care to expose myself to remarks. I did not get her, at all. When she got tired of the game at last, she rose from almost under my hand and flew aloft with the rush and whir of a shell and lit on the highest limb of a great tree and sat down and crossed her legs and smiled down at me, and seemed gratified to see me so astonished. I was ashamed, ashamed, ashamed; ashamed, and also lost; and it was while wandering the woods hunting for myself that I found a deserted log cabin and had one of the best meals there that in my life-days I have eaten. The weed-grown garden was full of ripe tomatoes, and I ate them ravenously ravenously ravenously ravenously, though I had never liked them before. Not more than two or three times since have I tasted anything that was so delicious as those tomatoes. I surfeited myself with them, and did not taste another one until I was in middle life. I can eat them now, but I do not like the look of them. I suppose we have all experienced a surfeit at one time or another. Once, in stress of circumstances, I ate part of a barrel of sardines, there being nothing else at hand, but since then I have always been able to get along without sardines. sardines. sardines. sardines. ¶ An appetite for almost any delicacy can be permanently destroyed by a single surfeit of it. It is so with salt pork. One of my oldest friends has had proof of this. He ate too much salt pork in the Adirondacks one summer, fifteen twenty years ago, and has not liked it since. Still, in this case, the circumstances could have helped, and he believes that they did. T. was up there with another friend of mine, by the m name of S. He was S.’s guest; S. was a very rich man and was paying all the bills. T. is a lovely man, and is not of a suspicious nature—a trustful man, and easily deceived. He had been all through the Civil War in a fighting regiment, and was as hardy as iron and as strong, and had a quartz-mill’s appetite and a freight-depôt’s capacity. S. was the other way; he was weak and lean and sickly, he had hardly any appetite, and what little he had, had to be coddled with half-ounces of rarities daintily cooked, or it would go on strike. S. and T. had been intimates from their college days, and could take liberties with each other without offence. One day sunset overtook them in the deeps of the wilderness, two or three or four miles from their quarters—two corrected to ‘too’ in pencil, probably not by SLC much of a return-walk for S. But there was a small log cabin there, with a sign on it, “Entertainment for Man and Beast,” so they applied for beds and food. The proprietor lived there alone, and was his own cook and chambermaid. He was a grave, robust backwoodsman, with a business aspect. He prepared supper, and put it on the table—boiled salt pork, coffee without sugar or milk, bread with the specific gravity of gold. S. fasted, of course, but T. ate for six, and enjoyed every shovelful. The beds were of the corduroy kind, ; S. got no sleep, but and the mosquitoses were thicker than dentists in Vienna; S. got no sleep, but T. slept the night through without a break and got up fresh and fine in the morning. The breakfast was a duplicate of the supper; S. could not touch it, but T. it was manna and quail to T., and he gathered it in like personified famine. To S., who was so hungry and so incompetent, this enjoyment was next to unendurable, and he tried to think of a way to damage it. He beckoned to the landlord, took him outside, and had a private talk with him: “We are going, presently. I am paying for both. What is your bill?” “Supper, lodging and breakfast, thirty-five cents apiece; but as you pay the whole and haven’t et a bite, knock of off twenty and call it half a dollar.”