13 September 1907 Dictated September September Sept. 13, 1907 World’s World’s World’s recent exposure of fact that Roosevelt bought his election—Remarks about Roosevelt—His proposed trip down the Mississippi—Mr. Clemens declines to join the excursion and pilot President’s boat—Copy of poem relating to this incident. The King’s garden party at Windsor—— But never mind about that now; I will take it up when to-day’s latest and freshest and newest interest in President Roosevelt and his antics shall have had a chance to quiet down—in case he should give it one, which is not likely. Three days ago the World newspaper convicted him, beyond redemption, of having bought his election to the Presidency with money. That he committed this stupendous crime has long been suspected—ever since election day, in fact—but the proofs have never been furnished until now. Judge Parker, the opposition candidate, made the charge at the time, in courteous parliamentary terms, but Mr. Roosevelt fiercely denied it—thus adding falsehood to his burden of misconduct. However, that was not much of an addition—for him; he is accustomed to it, and has a talent for it, although he detests false speaking in other people, and cannot abide it. At one time and another, during the past three years, he has frankly charged a dozen of the cleanest men in the country with being unveracious, unveracious, liars, unveracious, and in every instance has seemed almost really and sincerely shocked at it. Mr. Roosevelt is easily the most astonishing event in American history—if we except the discovery of the country by Columbus. The details of Mr. Roosevelt’s purchase of the Presidency by bribery of voters are all exposed now, even to the names of the men who furnished the money, and the amounts which each contributed. The men are great corporation chiefs, and three of them are Standard Oil monopolists. It is now known that when the canvass was over, a week before election day, and all legitimate uses for election-money at an end, Mr. Roosevelt got frightened and sent for Mr. Harriman to come to Washington and arrange measures to save the State of New York for the Republican party. The meeting took place, and Harriman was urged to raise two hundred thousand dollars for the cause. He raised two hundred and sixty thousand, and it was spent upon the election in the last week of the campaign—necessarily for the purchase of votes, since the time had gone by for using money in any other way. In a printed statement, Judge Parker now says: Obviously in the closing hours of the campaign but one practical use could be made of it, and that was to swell the fund already accumulated to secure beyond peradventure the large floating vote, builded up by years of effort to corrupt the electorate by means of moneys contributed by those who were willing to buy favors from those willing to sell them. Of the money subscribed, two hundred thousand dollars were spent in the City of New York, and Mr. Harriman claims that it changed the votes of fifty thousand floaters, thereby making a change in Mr. Roosevelt’s favor favor favor of a hundred thousand votes. For years the rich corporations have furnished vast sums of money to keep the Republican party in power, and have done this upon the understanding that their monopolies were to be shielded and protected in return. During all these years this protection has been faithfully furnished, in accordance with the agreement, but this time treachery intervened. Mr. Roosevelt saw that it would be popular to attack the great corporations, and he did not hesitate to retire from his contract and do it. Mr. Harriman and those others had bought him and paid for him, but that was nothing to a man who stands always ready to sell his honor for such a price as he can get for it in the market—for even a a a large advertisement, for that matter. Mr. Roosevelt is now rejoicing in the possession of a federal judge, of Chicago, who is a man after his own heart. This judge has fined the Standard Oil Company twenty-nine million two hundred and forty thousand dollars, upon a quibble, and the President is delighted, for it is a large and showy advertisement. It is quite unlikely that a higher court will affirm the decision, on appeal, but the President will care little for that; he has had his advertisement. He has sent Secretary Taft around the world on an electioneering trip—another advertisement. He is sending the United States navy to San Francisco by way of the Strait of Magellan—all for show, all for advertisement—although he is aware that if it gets disabled on its adventurous trip it cannot be repaired in the Pacific, for lack of docks; but the excursion will make a great noise, and this will satisfy Mr. Roosevelt. Mr. Roosevelt has done what he could to destroy the industries of the country, and they all stand now in a half-wrecked half-wrecked half wrecked condition and waiting in an ague to see what he will do next. One more shake-up and they will go, perhaps. He will certainly provide that shake-up, if he can get a sufficient advertisement out of it. That San Francisco earthquake which shook the the that the city down, and made such a noise in the world, was but a poor thing, and local; it confined itself to a narrow strip of the Pacific strand, and was a poor little back-settlement thing compared with Mr. Roosevelt; he is the real earthquake, and the most colossal one in history; when he quakes he convulses the entire land, from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and from Canada to the Gulf; not even a village escapes. In six months he has reduced the value of every species of property in the United States—in some cases 10 per cent 10 per cent ten per cent. , in others 20 per cent 20 per cent twenty per cent. , in still others 50 50 fifty per cent. Six months ago the country was worth a hundred and fourteen billions; it is not worth more than ninety ninety eighty ninety billions now. The public confidence is gone; it is possible that the public credit may follow. Mr. Roosevelt is the most formidable disaster that has befallen the country since the Civil War—but the vast mass of the nation loves him, is frantically fond of him, even idolizes him. This is the simple truth. It sounds like a libel upon the intelligence of the human race, but it isn’t; there isn’t any way to libel the intelligence of the human race. To descend to small matters: the President is about to start out on another advertising tour; two or three weeks hence he is going to review the Mississippi River—that poor old abandoned waterway waterway water-way marked to close up which was my field of usefulness when I was a pilot in the days of its high prosperity, nearly fifty years ago. He will start at Cairo and go down the river on a steamboat, and make a noise all the way. He is ready to lend himself to any wildcat scheme that any one can invent for the bilking of the Treasury, provided he can get an advertisement out of it. This time he goes as cat’s paw for that ancient and insatiable gang, the Mississippi Improvement conspirators conspirators conspiritors , who for thirty years have been annually sucking the blood of the Treasury and spending it in fantastic attempts to ameliorate the condition of that useless river—apparently that, really to feed the Republican vote out there. These efforts have never improved the river, for the reason that no effort of man can do that. The Mississippi will always have its own way; no engineering skill can persuade it to do otherwise; it has always torn down the petty basket-work of the engineers and poured its giant floods whithersoever it chose, and it will continue to do this. The President’s trip is in the interest of another wasted appropriation, and the project will succeed—succeed and furnish an advertisement. Three or four weeks ago the Mayor of Cairo invited me to come out and join the conspiracy and be a guest, but I said I couldn’t make so long a land journey at my time of life, I not being well able to endure such a strain upon my strength, and would therefore excuse myself. Memphis invited me also, and I excused myself upon the same plea. The next I heard was that I had accepted, and was going to steer the President’s boat, with my venerable boss, Bixby, standing guard over me in the pilot-house to see that I didn’t butt the boat’s brains out and leave the country “shy” of a President, as the slang phrase has it. Next appeared a wandering telegram which said I had “declined” “declined” “declined” to pilot the President’s boat. It was a gratuitous slur; I had made no remark which could be construed into a discourtesy to the Chief Magistrate; for the sake of my own self-respect self-respect self respect I would not do do have done that. However, some poetry has resulted—therefore I have my compensation. I love poetry—at least I love it when it advertises me. MARK TWAIN TO THE PRESIDENT. Note.—Mark Twain declines to pilot the steamboat which will take President Roosevelt down the Mississippi. I’m asked to steer that boat of yours, Theodore! O Theodore! Between the Mississippi shores, Theodore! O Theodore! But hear me now before you go: I shall not do it if I know Myself, because I’ll have no show, Theodore! O Theodore! When at the wheel to steer I stand, Theodore! O Theodore! You’ll butt in there to take a hand, Theodore! O Theodore! You’ll bang that wheel around like—well, You’ll bang it as I cannot tell, And I can only stand and yell: Theodore! O Theodore! If I should say to you, “Get out, Theodore! O Theodore! You do not know what you’re about,” Theodore! O Theodore! You’d gaze upon me fierce and glum; You’d think that I was going some, And say I was a liar, by gum, Theodore! O Theodore! Nay, nay! no piloting for me, Theodore! O Theodore! On board of any craft with thee, Theodore! O Theodore! I’m rather old and on the shelf; I do not care for fame and pelf— Say, steer the darned old boat yourself, Theodore! O Theodore! W. J. Lampton.