9 October 1906 Tuesday, October 9, 1906 Tuesday, October 9, 1906 Tuesday, October 9, 1906. Tuesday, October Dictated October 9, 1906. SLC deleted ‘Tuesday, October’ and inserted ‘Dictated’; Munro inserted ‘October’ and marked the dateline to precede ‘Onteora’ at 250.33 [Dictated October 8, 1906.] placed before ‘Onteora’ at 250.33 Item from Susy’s Biography Biography biography about visit to Onteora—Description of the primitive inhabitants. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography of Me. ‘From Susy’s Biography of Me.’ underscored From Susy’s Biography of Me. [1885–6.] From Susy’s Biography of Me [1885–6]. Mamma and papa have returned from Onteora and they have had a delightful visit. Mr. Frank Stockton was down in Virginia and could not reach Onteora in time, so they did not see him, and Mrs. Mary Mapes Dodge was ill and couldn’t go to Onteora, but Mrs. General Custer was there there there there, there, and mamma said that she was a very attractive, sweet appearing woman. Onteora was situated high up in the Catskill Mountains, in the centre centre center centerre centre of a far-reaching solitude. I do not mean that the region was wholly uninhabited; there were farm-houses farm-houses farm-houses farm houses farmhouses here and there, at generous distances apart. Their occupants were descendants of ancestors who had built the houses in Rip Van Winkle’s time, or earlier; and those ancestors were not more primitive than were this posterity of theirs. The city people were as foreign and unfamiliar and strange to them as monkeys would have been, and they would have respected the monkeys as much as they respected these elegant summer resorters summer resorters summer resorters summer-resorters . The resorters were a puzzle to them, them, them;, semicolon mended to a comma them, their ways were so strange and their interests so trivial. They drove the resorters over the mountain roads and listened in shamed surprise at their bursts of enthusiasm over the scenery. The farmers had had that scenery on exhibition from their mountain roosts all their lives, and had never noticed anything remarkable about it. By way of an incident: a pair of these primitives were overheard chatting about the resorters, one day, and in the course of their talk this remark was dropped, dropped, dropped, dropped. dropped: “I was a-drivin’ a passel of ’em round about yisterday evenin’ evenin’ evening’ evenin’ , quiet ones, you know, still and solemn, and all to wunst wunst onct wunst wunst they busted out to make your hair lift, lift, lift, lift and I judged hell was to pay. Now what do you reckon it was? It wa’n’t anything but jest one of them common damned yaller sunsets.” In those days—— days—— days—— days—