22 November 1906 Thursday, Thursday, Thursday, Thursday, Dictated November 22, 1906 The international copyright bills before Congress in ’86—Mr. Clemens supported the Chace Chace Chase Bill Bill Bbill —The young physician (now very old) who by drawing quaint pictures and writing original poems persuaded his little patients to take his odious mixtures, and who afterwards had these published in book form and is still living on income from his book, as he is a citizen of an honest country, Germany. Mr. Clemens will be seventy-one seventy-one 71 next week. His copyrights will soon begin to expire, therefore he must continue writing. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. of Me. ‘From Susy’s Biography of Me.’ underscored Feb. 12, ’86. Papa Feb. 12, ’86. [¶] Papa Feb. 12, ’86. [¶] Papa Feb. 12, ’86. [¶] Papa dateline marked to precede ‘Papa’ at 283.24 has long wanted us to have an international copywright in this country, so two or three weeks ago, he went to Washington to see what he could do to influence the government in favor of one. Here is a newspaper’s newspaper’s not in newspaper’s description of the hearing of the Senate that he attended. Jan. 30, ’86. The Outlook for International Copyright. Washington, January 30.—It is the impression of those who have followed the hearing in international copyright that the Senate Committee on Patents will report favorably the bill with the “printers’ amendment,” which is advocated by General Hawley, by Senator Chace Chace Chase , by Mr. Clemens, and other publishers who are also authors, and is accepted by the representative of the Typographical Union, which, as the agent of that Union somewhat grandiloquently told the Committee, through its affiliation with the Knights of Labor, speaks for from 4,000,000 to 5,000,000 people. Although it was clearly demonstrated to the Committee by Mr. Lowell and others others other that the American author is the only laborer who is obliged to compete with those who are not paid anything, the influence of the book manufacturers, and of labor unions, and of the various protected interests, is so strong in Congress that those who boast that they are “practical legislators” will not support a bill solely on the ground that, as Mr. Lowell put it, “it is a measure of morality and justice.” It is not, however, measures of morality and justice that can control the most votes. Mr. Clemens, in his humorous way, during the hearing said a very practical thing, in accordance with which the Committee is very likely to act. He said that while the American author has a great interest in American books, there are a great many others who are interested in book-making in its various forms, and the “other fellows” are the larger part. There were two international copyright bills before Congress at the time: (1) (1) not in (1) the Chace Chace Chase Bill Bill bBill , which recognized the claims of American printers and binders, and other trades which had acquired vested rights in the business of book-making, and (2) (2) not in (2) the Hawley Bill Bill bBill , which ignored these claims. It did not seem to me that Congress could properly abolish those rights; therefore in speaking before the Senate Committee I supported the Chace Chace Chase Bill Bill bBill bill . It was finally passed, and in the summer of 1891 it went into effect. 1891 1891 (1891) It was a lame, poor bill, as regards the rights and interests of foreign authors, foreign authors, foreign authors, both foreign and domestic, but this can be said with truth, and emphatically, of any copyright law, either foreign or domestic, law, either foreign or dometic, law law, either foreign or domestic, that has ever come into being since the invention of printing—except in Germany Germany Russia, Turkey, Germany Russia, Turkey, Germany , France, Italy, Sweden, Norway, Russia, Russia, not in Russia, and some other countries, civilized, half civilized, and savage. Of unmentioned governments governments Governments there remain two, Great Britain and the United States. Neither of these has ever passed a copyright bill which was not conspicuously distinguished for ignorance, robbery, and silliness. As I have said, the Chace Chace Chase Bill Bill bill was a lame lame lame, lame, poor affair, yet it was a great improvement upon any that had ever passed through the criminal Congressional Congressional congressional mill before. It had its share of silliness and villainy, but it could not be British nor American without these characteristics. Somewhere about 1888 or ’89, if my memory is correct, I went, one day, and paid my respects to the venerable author 1888 or ’89 1888 or ’89 (1888 or ’89) of “Struwwelpeter.” “Struwwelpeter.” “Struwwelpeter.” Hobby left a space for the name, which SLC supplied; a second ‘w’ was inserted in pencil on TS1 ribbon, in ink on TS1 carbon He was very old, not far short of eighty, I think. When he was a young physician and just getting into practice practice practise , his methods were the methods of that ancient time—that is to say, if a patient had any blood in him he pumped it out, and then filled up his body, body, stomach body, stomachbody, rotunda a dipperful at a time, with bitter and nauseating and odious mixtures compounded of ordure, and dead men’s fat, and the dried livers of toads, and ipecac, and calomel, and raisins, and spices, and lemon juice, and sugar, and spiders, and sewage sewage sewerage marked to close up , and asafetida, and molasses, and some of the blood that had been pumped out of the sufferer the day before. In some cases the patient survived; but in cases where the patient was a little child, the physician and the mother met met were met with difficulty, and obstruction, and resistance, and sobs, and tears, and pleadings, when the dipperful of filth was offered and the pair of touched and sympathetic executioners implored the child to swallow it. By and by the young physician discovered a new and powerful persuader, by accident. He did not know how to draw, and that was the valuable part of his discovery, for he drew a child that was so unlike any child that God had been able to design up to that time, that when the little patient by whose bed he was watching got a glimpse of it, that child was excited and delighted to the verge of convalescence. The young physician did not know how to write poetry, and that was another inestimably valuable addition to his discovery, for when he appended to the picture some lines of poetry, they were so far beyond human help, in their abandoned unliterariness unliterariness unliteraryiness , that when they were read to the patient they completed the cure. they completed the cure. the child’s cure was rounded and just about complete. the child’s cure was just about complete. they completed the cure cure. corrected miswriting To make it still still not in still completer, the young physician offered to make another picture, and purge himself of of with of another poem, if the child would agree to swallow the offered dipperful of slush without murmuring. The child was glad to sign the contract. From that day forth, the young physician moved upon all suffering nurseries equipped with pencil and paper and water-colors, and he had no more trouble with the children. He could draw a picture and do a poem in five minutes, and he was always able to trade these fascinatingly dreadful manufactures to his little patients on the terms just indicated. He kept his drawings and poems, in order that he might administer them, from time to time, to children that had not yet seen them but needed their persuasions, and by and by his accumulation of these things sufficed to fill a small table-drawer. Crude as the pictures were, and unconventional unconventional unconventional, and fearfully original as the poetry was, they were smart and witty and humorous, and to children they were limitlessly captivating. Somebody suggested to the young doctor that he publish these works in a little book. He did it. The little book was a primer, and was sold at a price which brought it within reach of even the leanest purse—four or five cents, I should say, I do not remember exactly. The sale was prodigious, and it has never ceased from being that in any year from that time till to-day. In the course of time it came to pass that the doctor doctor Ddoctor ‘D’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ stood in need of the income produced by that accidentally begotten primer, and when I saw him, in his old age, that income was his sole support. But it was sufficient. At that time his book was more than fifty years old—I should say fifty-five—but he was a citizen of an honest country, and his Government sat tranquilly by and saw him buy his bread with his own money without making any attempt to rob him of it, for by the German law the copyright term was fifty years, years, years,, years, and as many more years added to that as the author might live; whereas if he had been of the English or American breed of Christians, and product of the English and American breed of civilization, I should not have seen him, for he would have been already a dozen years in the poor house poor house poor-‖house , and meantime his and other publishers would have been stealing meantime his and other publishers would have been stealing meantime his and other publishers filching his meantime his and other publishers filching would have been stealing his children’s share of the profits of his book, with his Government standing by and approving. I am nearly seventy-one. I shall be seventy-one a week from now. I have supported myself by my own labor during every year for fifty-nine years. If I were living under an honorable honorable honest honorable government government Government I could retire from work, now, and take a holiday for the two or three years that possibly remain of my life; but I am not privileged to do that, because five years from now my copyrights will begin to expire, under the forty-two-year limit, under the forty-two-year limit, under the 42-year limit, and the publishers and their confederate, confederate, confederates, the Government, will begin to steal from my children the bread which I have earned for them; therefore instead of taking a vacation, I must dictate these memoirs and build them as a protecting fortress around and about my twenty-five twenty-five twenty-three twenty-threefive books, and by this means confer upon those books the equivalent of another twenty-eight years’ copyright. I should like to stop dictating and blaspheme blaspheme curse blaspheme a while, now, but I must not do it—I have reformed, until day after to-morrow.