24 July 1907 Dictated July 24, 1907 Dictated after an interval of six six 6 weeks—The journey to England on the Minneapolis Minneapolis Minneapolis ; events that transpired on board, and the English welcome by the stevedores. There has been an interval of six weeks. Originally I had intended to stay in England only ten or twelve days, but circumstances compelled me to add a fortnight to that. I sailed for London in the Minneapolis Minneapolis Minneapolis on the 8th of June, and took with me as temporary secretary and professional nurse Mr. Ashcroft—Ashcroft the Indelible Indelible iIndelible . That name has grown out of an accident of speech. Ashcroft is a young business man and knows how to do everything that I am incapable of doing, and whatever he undertakes to do he does promptly and in the best and most effective way; hence he never fails, and cannot fail. I have long thought of him privately in my mind as Ashcroft the Infallible Infallible iInfallible , but the first time that I tried to utter that phrase I made a mistake in the word and told Miss Lyon to call up Ashcroft the Indelible Indelible iIndelible . That is, call him up on the telephone and place the pending impossibility in his hands and leave the result to him. him. him. and the Deity. Ashcroft has remained Ashcroft the Indelible Indelible iIndelible ever since. We had a lazy, comfortable, homelike, nine-day passage, over smooth seas, with not enough motion in a thousand miles to make a baby sick. The ships of that line are very large and very steady, and most satisfactorily slow and deliberate. They have spacious decks, and every passenger has a deal more room than he needs; they are freight ships, and have accommodation for only a handful of passengers. This one was full, with only a hundred and fifty-four. Fifty-one of them were college girls, with girls, with girls, and with their protectors, protectors, protectors, going out on vacation to study Europe. This was pleasant to me, who am rather abnormally partial to young girls. I took care of the most of these, and did it very well, as everybody conceded. The pick of the flock was a very pretty and very sweet child of seventeen who looked only fourteen, and who seemed only fourteen, and remained only fourteen to me to the end of the voyage. I selected her before we were out of sight of land, and borrowed her from her three elderly aunts and placed her at my side at the captain’s table, and from that time until the end of the voyage she had no occasion to miss her mother—if I do say it myself that shouldn’t. Her name was Carlotta, but I changed it to Charley, which seemed to me to improve it. She was a gifted and cultivated little creature. On the last night out there was the usual concert in the dining room dining room dining-room , for the benefit of the Seamen’s Hospital. Charley played a violin solo to admiration, and astonished everybody. She wasn’t much bigger than her fiddle, but she made it talk a moving and majestic language. I made a speech; other excellent people sang songs, and punished the piano. Rev. Dr. Patton, that verbal and intellectual wonder, twenty-five years President of Princeton University, conducted the concert, then concert, then concert, and then finished his services with a brilliant exhibition of what a university president can do when he turns himself into an auctioneer. There was a jack-legged draughtsman draughtsman drafughtsman on board who made some unimaginably poor caricatures of me on six post-cards post-cards postcards ; I autographed them, and Rev. Dr. Patton set himself the task of auctioneering off the six for eighty dollars. It furnished him a stubborn stubborn lively stubborn job, but he is not of the easily discouraged kind and he stayed faithfully by his enterprise until he accomplished it. In my talk I departed from the humorous for a while, and was greatly gratified with the result. I was expecting those people to cry, and they did. Afterward a deputation of ladies visited me on deck, and the spokeswoman said— “We admired you before, but we love you now.” I did not suspect that a note was struck then whose gracious music was to continue to fall upon my grateful ears day and night, unceasingly, through all my stay in England. It made that journey of mine rich beyond expression in words. I am old, but I would repeat the the thate journey not merely once, but ten times, for the like compensation. At the end of nine days we reached the dock at Tilbury, and the hearty and happy and memorable English welcome began. Who began it? The very people of all people in the world whom I would have chosen: a hundred men of my own class—grimy sons of labor, the real builders of empires and civilizations, the stevedores! They stood in a body on the dock and charged their masculine lungs, and gave me a welcome which went to the marrow of me.