3 December 1906 December 3, 1906 December 3, 1906 Autobiog. From Chapter XVII. * * * This was in Vienna, in 1897, as before remarked.in chapter XII. Dec. 3, 1906 Dec. 3, 1906. Dictated Dec. 3, 1906. [Dictated October 3, 190ö.] Mesmerism continued—The Baron F. incident. Mesmerism continued—The Baron F. incident. not in (Copied from Mr. Clemens’s notes). [¶] Mesmerism continued—The Baron F. incident. not in One One That same One One evening we dined with the C.’s, C.’s, C.’s, C.’s (in Vienna, in 1897), (in Vienna, in 1897), (in Vienna, in 1897, (in Vienna, in 1897), and after dinner a number of friends of the family 1897 1897 1897 in margin, boxed 1897) typed in the margin (1897.) inset dropped in to smoke and chat; among them G., who had dined with the X.’s. He brought with him an incident. It was to this effect. When dinner was announced a guest was still lacking—the Baron F., a cousin of Herr X. Ten minutes later he had not yet arrived; then he was given up, and the company went to the table. Between soup and fish the Baron arrived and was ushered in in in in —a large and strongly built man about fifty years old, with iron gray iron gray iron gray iron-gray hair and a harsh and hard face. With a perfunctory word of excuse for his tardiness he took his seat and began to unfold his napkin; in the midst of this function he stopped, and began to stare across the table at a Mr. B., a visiting Englishman of grave mien and middle age. As he stared his countenance darkened, and assumed an expression of hatred of the most bitter and uncompromising kind; the napkin fell from his hands, and he got up abruptly and stalked out of the room. X., astonished, left his bewildered guests and followed, to see what the matter was. He found the Baron gloving himself for departure. He was not exactly frothing at the mouth, but was near to doing it. In answer to X.’s anxious inquiries, he said— “No, give yourself no concern, it isn’t anything that’s happened here—it dates back, away back. I can’t be mistaken, mistaken, mistaken, mistaken; that’s an Englishman Englishman Englishman Englishman, and his name is B. Isn’t it so?” “Yes.” “Well, I’ve seen him only once before, and it’s twenty-seven years ago, but I know him, him, him, him; I would recognize him in Siberia, in Sahara, in hell! How fortunate that I couldn’t reach him—I don’t wish to be a murderer!” “Why, what was the trouble? What did he do?” “Do? Oh, oh, oh, it’s too horrible to think of! Out of my way—don’t detain me; do you want me to kill him?” That was the incident, and that was all that G. knew. Enough to heat our curiosity to the sizzling point sizzling point sizzling point sizzling-point , and raise a world of excited wondering and guessing; and valuable to that degree in a smoking-klatch, but we had to wait several days before we got the tale’s sequel. Which was this. In 1870 B. was living in London. He was a young fellow with an alert and inquiring mind and a sharp appetite for novelties. He had taken up mesmerism—as it was then called—and and and ‖ and and was doing with it many of the strange things afterward done by Charcot under its other name of hypnotism. One evening B. was exhibiting some of these marvels in the house of an eminent man of science, and had brought with him for the purpose subjects whom he had experimented upon before. A gentleman present begged him to come to his house in Sydenham, and give a similar exhibition before friends of his. B. said— “I will, on this condition: that you provide a dozen persons, for experiment, whom you know, but who shall be strangers to me; this in order that collusion cannot be charged. I may not be able to affect any of them, but out of the dozen I can expect to affect one or two at least.” The condition was accepted, and the day appointed. But the day before the date chosen, the gentleman sent a note saying he had failed to get anybody to consent, and begging B. to bring subjects himself. B. took with him a young man who was an easy subject, and whom he had often mesmerized mesmerized mesmerised mesmerized before. The two went upon a platform which had been arranged at the end of a drawing-room, and faced a company of forty men—some young, some middle-aged; some fashionable and frivolous, some of a graver stamp; some sarcastic of aspect, the others blandly unfriendly. B. noted this unpleasant atmosphere and was sorry he had not exacted the original terms. He tried to recover that lost ground by inviting the gentlemen present to provide him with subjects from their number, and said he would regard it as a great favor if his request could be complied with. He waited, but got only silence—there was no other response. He then mesmerized his young man, and made him mistake salt for sugar, sugar for salt, chalk for alum alum alum alumn , alum alum alum alumn for chalk, water water watter water corrected miswriting water for brandy, brandy for milk, and so on; made him see ships sailing on the sea, houses on fire, battles, horse-races, and all such things—and all through these performances the audience smiled contempt, and a group of young fashionables, one of whom was standing, and leaning indolently against the wall, uttered low-voiced ejaculations: ejaculations: ejaculations: ejaculations; ejaculations: “Humbug!” “charlatan!” etc. It was intended that B. should hear, and he heard. He expected his host to interfere and protect him from these insults, insults, insults,— insults, and glanced a hint or two at him; but evidently the host was afraid. B. recognized that if he was to have any protection he must furnish it himself. He tried to locate one of those affronts and make sure of the mouth it came from, but he was never quick enough. The dandy who leaned against the wall seemed to be the ringleader ringleader ring-leader , but B. was not sure of it. He went on with his demonstrations, growing angrier and angrier all the while, and the offensive comments continued. He now said— “I will now make this subject’s body as rigid as iron; and will ask any that doubt, to come on the platform and examine him and test him.” He stretched the young man in the air, with his head upon one table and his heels upon another, and no support between, and invited the doubters to come and apply their tests. No one moved. There was an ejaculation: “Just a tuppenny tuppenny tuppenny tuppeny juggler and his hired pal!” pal!” confederate!” pal!” pal!” This time B. spotted the utterer; it was the young fashionable who was leaning against the wall. He limbered up his subject with a few passes, then turned to the audience and said— “I was invited to come here, I did not invite myself. I was invited as a gentleman, to meet gentlemen; you best know why the host’s part of the contract has not been fulfilled. You lack lack are lack lack the courage to come on this platform and submit to tests in your own persons, yet you have the courage—being many—to insult me, who am but one, and—as you think—not able to resent it. You do not believe in mesmerism; you do not believe in the genuineness of my demonstrations; you shall have a test that will convince you. I require the person leaning against the wall to come here.” He bent bent bemnt ‘m’ mended to ‘n’ bent his gaze upon the person, who gazed back—gazed and still gazed, B. beckoning—beckoning, drawing him, the audience watching. “Now then—come!” The new subject moved slowly slowly stlowly slowly forward, with his eyes fixed upon B.’s, and arrived upon the platform. “Stop!” The man stopped. “Get up and stand in this chair.” The man obeyed. “What do you see?—the ocean?” The man nodded his head dreamily. “Is it at your feet? do do do Do you see the waves washing in?” More nods. “Do you not notice how hot it is? Why do you wear such heavy clothes in such weather? Throw them off and take a plunge—it will do you good.” The man took off his coat. “Now your vest—throw it down. Now Now “Now Now your trowsers trowsers trowsers trousers —throw them down. Now your shirt. Now the underclothes. There—plunge! Stop!” B. turned to the house and continued: “Here stands one unbeliever—a Mayfair man—a society man—a swell—a smirking lady-killer—a perfumed drawing-room dandy, contemptuous of other people’s feelings and sensitive about his own, proud of his prettiness, vain of his charms—here they all are before you, stark naked! As he is, so shall you be; so help me God I will now now not in now strip every coward of you to the skin!” But he didn’t. There was a wild rush and scramble, and the place was vacant in a minute. The naked man was Baron F. Baron F. Baron F. Mark Twain paraph Baron F.