19 November 1906 Monday, November 19, 1906 Monday, November 19, 1906 Monday, Nov. 19, 1906. Monday, Dictated Nov. 19, 1906. revised by SLC; dateline marked by Munro to precede ‘Ever since’ at 273.3 [Dictated Nov. 19, 1906.[ [Dictated Nov. 19, 1906.] Susy’s spelling—More remarks about Simplified Simplified simplified Spelling. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. Ever since papa and mamma were married, papa has written his books and then taken them to mamma in manuscript and she has expergated them. Papa read “Huckleberry Finn” to us in manuscript just before it came out, and then he would leave parts of it with mamma to expergate, while he went off up to the study to with mamma . . . study to with mamma . . . study to not in work, and sometimes Clara and I would be sitting with mamma while she was looking the manuscript over, and I remember so well, with what pangs of regret we used to see her turn down the leaves of the pages, which meant that some delightfully dreadful part must be scratched out. And I remember one part pertickularly which was perfectly fascinating it was dreadful, that Clara and I used to delight in, and oh with what dispair we saw mamma turn down the leaf on which it was written, we thought the book would be almost ruined without it. But we gradually came to feel as mamma did. It would be a pity to replace the vivacity and quaintness and felicity of Susy’s innocent free spelling with the dull and petrified uniformities of the spelling book spelling book spelling-book . Nearly all the grimness is taken out of the “expergating” of my books books books, books by the subtle mollification accidentally infused into the word by Susy’s modification of the spelling of it. I remember the special case mentioned by Susy, and can see the group yet—two-thirds of it pleading for the life of the culprit sentence that was so fascinatingly dreadful and the other third of it patiently explaining why the court could not grant the prayer of the pleaders; but I do not remember what the condemned phrase was. It had much company, and they all went to the gallows; but it is possible that that specially dreadful one which gave those little people so much delight was cunningly devised and put into the book for just that function, and not with any hope or expectation that it would get by the expergator expergator expergator “expergator” “expergator” alive. It is possible, for I had that custom. Susy’s quaint and effective spelling falls quite opportunely into to-day’s atmosphere, which is heavy with the rumblings and grumblings and mutterings of the Simplified Spelling Reform. Andrew Carnegie started this storm, a couple of years ago, by moving a simplifying of English orthography, and establishing a fund for the prosecution and maintenance of the crusade. He began gently. He addressed a a the a a circular to some hundreds of his friends, asking them to simplify the spelling of a dozen of our badly spelt words—I think they were only words which end with the superfluous ugh. He asked that these friends use the suggested spellings in their private correspondence. By this, one perceives that the beginning was sufficiently quiet and unaggressive; but of course the newspapers got hold of it; and they got as much fun out of it as they could have gotten out of a funeral, or any of the other things which to the average newspaper mind are particularly ludicrous. unaggressive; but . . . are . . . ludicrous. unaggressive; but . . . is . . . ludicrous. unaggressive.; but . . . is . . . ludicrous. unaggressive. Next stage: a small committee was appointed, with Brander Matthews for managing director and spokesman. It issued a list of three hundred words, of average silliness as to spelling, and proposed new and sane spellings for these words. The President of the United States, unsolicited, adopted these simplified three hundred officially, and ordered that they be used in the official documents of the Government. It was now remarked, by all the educated and the thoughtful except the clergy, all . . . except the clergy, all . . . except the clergy, and others, all . . . except the clergy and others, all . . . except the clergy that Sheol Sheol hell Sheol Sheol was to pay. This was most justly and comprehensively descriptive. The indignant British lion rose, with a roar that was heard across the Atlantic, and stood there on his little isle, gazing, red-eyed, out over the glooming seas, seas, seas, seas, snow-flecked with driving spindrift, and lashing his tail—a most scary spectacle to see. The lion was outraged because we, a nation of children, without any grown-up people among us, and and and not in with no property in the language, but using it merely by courtesy of its owner owner owner, owner, owner the English nation, were trying to defile the sacredness of it by removing from it peculiarities which had been its ornament and which had made it holy and beautiful for ages. In truth there is a certain sardonic propriety in preserving our orthography, since ours is a mongrel language which started with a child’s vocabulary of three hundred words, and now consists of two hundred and twenty-five thousand; the whole lot, with the exception of the original and legitimate three hundred, borrowed, stolen, smouched from every unwatched unwatched unwastched unwatched language under the sun, the spelling of each individual word word word word of the lot locating the source of the theft and preserving the memory of the revered revered holy revered revered crime. Why is it that I have intruded into this turmoil and manifested a desire to get our orthography purged of its asininities? Indeed I do not know why I should manifest any interest in the matter, for at bottom I disrespect disrespect despise disrespect disrespect our orthography most heartily, and as heartily disrespect disrespect despise disrespect disrespect everything that has been said by anybody in defence defence defensce defence of it. Nothing professing to be a defence defence defensce defence of our ludicrous spellings has had any basis, so far as my observation goes, basis, so far as my observation goes, basis, so far as my observation goes, basis, so far as my observation goes, except sentimentality. In these “arguments” “arguments” drivelings “arguments” “arguments” the term venerable is used instead of mouldy, and hallowed instead of devilish; devilish; hell-fire; devilish; devilish; whereas there is nothing properly venerable or antique about a language which is not yet four hundred years old, and about a jumble of insane insane insane insane imbecile imbecile spellings which were grotesque in the beginning, and which grow more and more grotesque with the flight of the years. However, I like to have a hand in whatever is going on, and so I took a hand in the Spelling Reform and made a speech upon the subject before the Associated Press delegates, last September, in these words: I [¶] I flush right: Simplified Spelling Board Circular No. 9, Nov. 10, 1906 centered: MARK TWAIN ON SIMPLIFIED SPELLING [a speech at the annual dinner of the associated press held in new york, september 19, 1906, revised expressly for the simplified spelling board] [¶] I am here to make an appeal to the nations in behalf of the Simplified Spelling Simplified Spelling simplified spelling . I have come here because they cannot all be reached except thru you. There are only two forces that can carry light to all the corners of the globe—only two—the sun in the heavens and the the The Associated Press down here. I may seem to be flattering the sun, but I do not mean it so; I am meaning only to be just and fair all around. You speak with a million voices; no one can reach so many races, so many hearts and intellects, as you—except Rudyard Kipling, and he cannot cannot can not do it without your help. If the the The Associated Press will adopt and use our simplified forms, and thus spread them to the ends of the earth, covering the whole spacious planet with them as with a garden of flowers, our difficulties are at an end. Every day of the 365 the only pages of the world’s countless newspapers that are read by all the human beings and angels and devils that can read, are those pages that are built out of Associated Press dispatches. And so I beg you, I beseech you—oh, I implore you to spell them in our simplified forms. Do this daily, constantly, persistently, for three months—only three months—it is all I ask. The infallible result?—victory, victory all down the line. For by that time all eyes here and above and below will have become adjusted to the change and in love with it, and the present clumsy and ragged forms will be grotesque to the eye and revolting to the soul. And we shall be rid of phthisis and phthisic and pneumonia and pneumatics, and diphtheria and pterodactyl, and all those other insane words which no man addicted to the simple Christian life can try to spell and not lose some of the bloom of his piety in the demoralizing attempt. Do not doubt it. Do I seem to be seeking the good of the world? That is the idea. It is my public attitude; privately I am merely seeking my own profit. We all do it, but it is sound and it is virtuous, for no public interest is anything other or nobler than a massed accumulation of private interests. In 1883, when the Simplified Spelling Simplified Spelling simplified spelling movement first tried to make a noise, I was indifferent to it; more—I even irreverently scoffed at it. What I needed was an object lesson, you see. It is the only way to teach some people. Very well, I got it. At that time I was scrambling along, earning the family’s bread on magazine work at seven seven 7 cents a word, compound words at single rates, just as it is in the dark present. I was the property of a magazine, a seven-cent slave under a boiler-iron contract. One day there came a note from the editor requiring me to write ten pages on this revolting text: “Considerations concerning the alleged subterranean holophotal extemporaneousness of the conchyliaceous superimbrication of the ornithorhyncus, as foreshadowed by the unintelligibility of its plesiosaurian anisodactylous aspects.” Ten pages of that. Each and every word a seventeen-jointed vestibuled railroad train. Seven cents a word. I saw starvation staring the family in the face. I went to the editor, and I took a stenographer along so as to have the interview down in black and white, for no magazine editor can ever remember any part of a business-talk business-talk business talk except the part that’s got graft in it for him and the magazine. I said, “Read that text, Jackson, and let it go on the record; read it out loud.” He read it: “Considerations concerning the alleged subterranean holophotal extemporaneousness of the conchyliaceous superimbrication of the ornithorhyncus as foreshadowed by the unintelligibility of its plesiosaurian anisodactylous aspects.” I said, “You want ten pages of those rumbling, great long summer thunder-peals and you expect to get them at seven seven 7 cents a peal?” He said, “A word’s a word, and seven seven 7 cents is the contract; what are you going to do about it?” I said, “Jackson, this is cold-blooded oppression. What’s an average English word?” He said, “Six letters.” I said, “Nothing of the kind; that’s French, and includes the spaces between the words; an average English word is four letters and a half. By hard honest labor I’ve dug all the large words out of my vocabulary and shaved it down till the average is three letters and a half. I can put 1,200 words on your page, and there’s not another man alive that can come within two hundred of it. My page is worth $84 to me. It takes exactly as long to fill your magazine page with long words as it does with short ones—four hours. Now then, look at the criminal injustice of this requirement of yours. I am careful, I am economical of my time and labor. For the family’s sake I’ve got to be. So I never write ‘metropolis’ for seven seven 7 cents, because I can get the same money for ‘city.’ I never write ‘policeman,’ because I can get the same price for ‘cop.’ And so on and so on. I never write ‘valetudinarian’ at all, for not even hunger and wretchedness can humble me to the point where I will do a word like that for seven seven 7 cents; I wouldn’t do it for fifteen fifteen 15 . Examine your shameful text, please; count the words.” He counted, and said it was twenty-four twenty-four 24 . I asked him to count the letters. He made it 203. I said, “Now, I hope you see the whole size of your contemplated crime. With my vocabulary I would make sixty sixty 60 words out of those 203 letters, and get $4.20 for it; whereas for your inhuman twenty-four twenty-four 24 I would get only $1.68. Ten pages of these sky-scrapers sky-scrapers skyscrapers of yours would pay me only about $300; in my simplified vocabulary the same space and the same labor would pay me $840. I do not wish to work upon this scandalous job by the piece, I want to be hired by the year.” He coldly refused. I said: “Then for the sake of the family, if you have no feeling for me, you ought at least to allow me overtime on that word ‘extemporaneousness.’ ” Again he coldly refused. I seldom say a harsh word to any one, but I was not master of myself then, and I spoke right out and called him an anisodactylous plesiosaurian conchyliaceous ornithorhyncus, and rotten to the heart with holophotal subterranean extemporaneousness. God forgive me for that wanton crime; he lived only two hours! From that day to this I have been a devoted and hard-working member of that heaven-born institution, the International Association for the Prevention of Cruelty to Authors, and now I am laboring with the Simplified Committee, and with my heart in the work. Now then, let us look at this mighty question reasonably, rationally, sanely—yes, and calmly, not excitedly. What is the real function, the essential function, the supreme function, of language? Isn’t it merely to convey ideas and emotions? Certainly. Then if we can do it with words of fonetic brevity and compactness, why keep the present cumbersome forms? But can we? Yes. I hold in my hand the proof of it. Here is a letter written by a woman, right out of her heart of hearts. I think she never saw a spelling book spelling book spelling-book in her life. The spelling is her own. There isn’t a waste letter in it anywhere: it reduces the fonetics to the last gasp—it squeezes the surplusage out of every word—there’s no spelling that can begin with it on this planet outside of the White House. And as for the punctuation, there isn’t any. It is all one sentence, eagerly and breathlessly uttered, without break or pause in it anywhere. The letter is absolutely genuine—I have the proofs of that in my possession. I can’t stop to spell the words for you, but you can take the letter presently and comfort your eyes with it:— “Miss —— dear freind i took some Close into the armerry and give them to you to Send too the suffrers out to California and i Hate to truble you but i got to have one of them Back it was a black oll woole Shevyott With a jacket to Mach trimed Kind of Fancy no 38 Burst measure and passy menterry acrost the front And the color i woodent Trubble you but it belonged to my brothers wife and she is Mad about It. I thoght she was willin but she want she says she want done with it and she was going to Wear it a Spell longer she ant so free harted as what i am and she Has got more to do with Than i have having a Husband to Work and slave For her i gess you remember Me I am shot and stout and light complected i torked with you quite a spell about the suffrars and said it was orful about that erth quake I shoodent wondar if they had another one rite off seeine general Condision of the country is Kind of Explossive i hate to take that Black dress away from the suffrars but i will hunt round And see if i can get another One if i can i will call to the armerry for it if you will jest lay it asside so no more at present from your True freind. i liked your appearance very Much.” Now you see what Simplified Spelling Simplified Spelling simplified spelling can do. It can convey any fact you need to convey; and it can pour out emotions like a spellbinder spellbinder spell-binder . I beg you, I beseech you, to adopt our spelling, and print all your dispatches in it. Now, I wish to say just one entirely serious word: I have reached a time of life, seventy years and a half, where none of the concerns of this world have much interest for me personally. I think I can speak dispassionately upon this matter, because, in the little while that I have got to remain here I can get along very well with these old-fashioned forms, and I don’t propose to make any trouble about it at all. There are eighty-two millions eighty-two millions 82,000,000 of us people that use this orthography, and it ought to be simplified in our behalf, but it is kept in its present condition to satisfy a million a million 1,000,000 people who like to have their literature in the old form. That looks to me to be rather selfish, and we keep the forms as they are while we have got a hundred thousand a hundred thousand 100,000 people coming in here from foreign countries every month and they have got to struggle with this orthography of ours, and it keeps them back and damages their citizenship for years until they learn to spell the language, if they ever do learn. There is really no argument against reform except merely sentimental argument. People say it is the spelling of Chaucer and Spenser and Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakespeare and a lot of other people who did not know how to spell anyway, and it has been transmitted to us and we preserved it and wish to continue to preserve it because of its ancient and hallowed associations. If that argument is good, then it would be a good argument not to banish the flies and the cockroaches from hospitals because they have been there so long that the patients have got used to them and they feel a tenderness for them on account of the associations. associations. associations. rule [¶] For information about the Simplified Spelling Board and copies of its publications, address SIMPLIFIED SPELLING BOARD, 1 Madison Avenue, New York.