13 December 1906 December 13, 1906 December 13, 1906 THE COMING AMERICAdblL/dblN MONARCHY by mark twain. Dictated Dec.ember 13, 1906 SLC corrected and then deleted the title; he added ‘Dictated Dec.’ followed by a circled blank space with the marginal note: ‘Make the dictation-date the day after Root’s speech. I don’t know the date myself. Mark’; an NAR editor, probably Munro, inserted ‘ember 13, 1906’ [Dictated December 13, 1906.] As regards the coming American monarchy. As regards the coming American monarchy. As regards the coming American monarchy. As regards the coming American monarchy. It was before Mr. Root Mr. Root Mr. Root the Secretary of State had been heard from that the chairman of the banquet said: “In this time of unrest it is of great satisfaction that such a man as you, Mr. Root, is chief adviser of the President.” President.” President.’’ single quotation mark mended to double President.” Mr. Root then got up and in the most quiet and orderly manner touched off the successor to the San Francisco earthquake. As a result, the several State governments were well shaken up and considerably weakened. Mr. Root was prophesying. He was prophesying, and it seems to me that no shrewder and surer forecasting has been done in this country for a good many years. He did not say, in so many words, that we are proceeding, in a steady march, toward eventual and unavoidable replacement of the republic by monarchy; but I suppose he was aware that that is the case. He notes the several steps, the customary steps, which in all the ages have led to the consolidation of loose and scattered governmental forces into formidable centralizations of authority; but he stops there, and doesn’t doesn’t doesn’t doesn’t add up the sum. He is not unaware that heretofore the sum has been ultimate monarchy, and that the same figures can fairly be depended upon to furnish upon to furnish to add up upon to furnish upon to furnish the same sum whenever and wherever they can be produced, so long as human nature shall remain as it is; but it was not needful that he do the adding, since any one can do it; neither would it have been gracious in him to do it. In observing the changed conditions which in the course of time have made certain and sure the eventual eventual eventual eventual seizure seizure siezure seizure by the Washington Government Government government of a number of State duties and duties and duties and duties and prerogatives which have been betrayed and neglected by the several States, he does not attribute those changes and the vast results which are to flow from them to any thought-out policy of any party or of of of any body of dreamers or schemers, but properly and rightly attributes them to that stupendous power—Circumstance Circumstance cCircumstance Circumstances Circumstance —which moves by laws laws laws laws corrected miswriting laws of its own, regardless of parties and policies, and whose decrees are final, and must be obeyed by all—and will be. The railway is a Circumstance, the steamship is a Circumstance, the telegraph is a Circumstance. They were mere happenings; and to the whole world, the wise and the foolish alike, they were they were they were they were entirely trivial, wholly inconsequential; indeed silly, comical, grotesque. No No No No man, and no party, and no thought-out policy said, “Behold, “Behold, “Lo, “Behold, “Behold, we will build railways and steamships and telegraphs, and presently you will see the condition and way of life of every man and woman and child in the nation totally changed; unimaginable changes of law and custom will follow, in spite of anything that anybody can do to prevent it.” The changed conditions have come, and Circumstance knows what is following, and will follow. So does Mr. Root. His language is not unclear, it is crystal: “Our whole life has swung away from the old State centres and is crystallizing crystallizing crystal-izing crystallizing about national national State national national centres.” “. . . . the old barriers which kept the States as separate communities are completely lost from sight.” “. . . . that [State] power of regulation and control is gradually passing into the hands of the national government.” “Sometimes by an assertion of the inter-State commerce power, sometimes by an assertion of the taxing power, the national government is taking up the performance of duties which under the changed conditions the separate States are no longer capable of adequately performing.” “We are urging forward in a development of business and social life which tends more and more to the obliteration of State lines and the decrease of State power as compared with national power.” “It is useless for the advocates of State rights to inveigh against . . . the extension of national authority in the fields of necessary control where the States themselves fail in the performance of their duty.” He is not announcing a policy; he is not forecasting what a party of planners will bring about; he is merely telling what the people will require and compel. And he could have added—which would be perfectly true—that the people will not be moved to it by speculation and cogitation and planning, but by Circumstance—that power which arbitrarily compels all their their their our their their actions, and over which they they they we they they have not the slightest control. “The end is not yet.” It is a true word. We are on the march, but at present we are only just getting started. If the States continue to fail to do do do do corrected miswriting do their duty as required by the people— “. . . . constructions of the Constitution Constitution cConstitution Constitution will be found to vest the power where it will be exercised—in the national government.” government.” government.” [¶] I like it. It’s ship-money over again: if the coast can’t furnish enough of it for the king’s needs, go out & stretch the lan government.” I do not know whether that has a sinister meaning or not, and so I will not enlarge upon it lest I should chance to should chance to should chance to should chance to be in the wrong. It sounds sounds sounds csounds like ship-money come again, but it may not be so intended. intended. intended. centered: II intended. centered: II ‘blank line’ written in the margin intended. Human nature being what it is, I suppose we must expect to drift into monarchy by and by. It is a saddening thought, but we cannot change our nature: we are all alike, we human beings; and in our blood and bone, and ineradicable, we carry the seeds out of which monarchies and aristocracies are grown: worship of gauds gauds gauds ganuds , titles, distinctions, power. We have to worship these things and their possessors, we are all born so, and we cannot help it. We have to be despised by somebody whom we regard as above us, or we are not happy; we have to have somebody to worship and envy, or we cannot be content. In America we manifest this in all the ancient and customary ways. In public we scoff at titles and hereditary privilege, but privately we hanker after them, and when we get a chance we buy them for cash and a daughter. Sometimes we get a good man and worth the price, but we are ready to take him anyway anyway anyway any way marked to join up , whether he be ripe or rotten, whether he be clean and decent, or merely a basket of noble and sacred and long-descended offal offal offal offal . And when we get him the whole nation publicly chaffs and scoffs—and privately privately privately privately envies; and also is proud of the honor which has been conferred upon us. We run over our list list titled list list of titled purchases every now and then, in the newspapers newspapers newspapers newspapers , and discuss them and caress them, and are thankful and happy. Like all the other nations, we worship money and the possessors of it—they being our aristocracy, and we have to have one. it—they being our aristocracy . . . have one. it.—they being our aristocracy . . . have one. it—they being our aristiocracy . . . have one. it—they being our aristocracy . . . have one. We like to read about rich people in the papers; the papers know it, and they do their best to keep this appetite liberally fed. They even leave out a foot-ball foot-ball foot-ball football bull-fight bull-fight bull-fight bull-fight now and then to get room room room to give room room for all the particulars of how—according to the display-heading display-heading scare display-heading display heading —“Rich Woman Fell Fell Fell F!ell marked to close up Down Cellar—Not Not Not nNot Hurt.” The falling down the cellar is of no interest to us when the woman is not rich, but no rich woman can fall down cellar and we not yearn to know all about it and wish wish we not wish wish it was us. In a monarchy the people willingly and rejoicingly revere and take pride in their nobilities, and are not humiliated by the reflection that this humble and hearty homage gets no return but contempt. Contempt does not shame them, they are used to it, and they recognize recognize recognise recognize that it is their proper due. We are all made like that. In Europe we easily and quickly learn to take that attitude toward the sovereigns and the aristocracies; moreover, it has been observed that when we get the attitude we go on and exaggerate it, presently becoming more servile than the natives, and vainer of it. The next step is to rail and scoff at republics and democracies. All of which is natural, for we have not ceased to be human beings by becoming Americans, and the human race was always intended to be governed by kingship, not by popular vote. I suppose we we th we we must expect that unavoidable unavoidable C unavoidable unavoidable and irresistible Circumstances will gradually take away the powers of the States and concentrate them in the central government, and that the republic will then repeat the history of all time and become a monarchy; but I believe believe believe believe that if we obstruct these encroachments and steadily resist them the monarchy can be postponed for a good while yet. yet. yet. In which case I doubt if we shall have any American dukes before the third quarter of this century. Mark Twain paraph yet.