10 October 1906 Wednesday, Wednesday, Wednesday, Wednesday, Dictated October 10, 1906 The visit to Onteora—Dinner at Mrs. Dodge’s—Mr. Clemens’s method of quieting the racket at table—Some of the practical jokes which Dean Sage played on Mr. Twichell. I couldn’t finish, yesterday. It was one of those exasperating times when the brain is clogged and muddy and the words refuse to come: a come: a come:. A a period mended to a colon; ‘A’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ body may know quite well what he wants to say; the idea in his mind may have shape and form, but by no ingenuity can the right words be found for the phrasing. Sometimes dogged persistency and determined effort will eventually improve the conditions and turn on the words and make them flow, but this does not often happen. The thing that does happen is that you may lose your temper, break some furniture, and quit for the day. That is what happened yesterday. When the words will not come there is always a good reason for it, and always the same reason—broken sleep the night before. Susy Susy Susy . . . . [Dictated, October 10, 1906.] Susy SLC inserted the ellipses; Munro canceled them and inserted the dateline [Dictated, October 10, 1906.] Susy has named a number of the friends who were assembled at Onteora at the time of our visit, visit, visit, visit, visit, but there were others—among them Laurence Hutton, Charles Dudley Warner, and Carroll Carroll Carrol Carroll Beckwith, and their wives. Beckwith, and their wives. Beckwith. Beckwith., and their wives. Beckwith, and their wives. 1890 1890 1890 (1890.) inset It was a bright and jolly jolly jolly and gifted jolly company. Some of those choice spirits are still with us; the others have passed from this life: Mrs. Clemens, Susy, Mr. Mr. Mr. Mr Mr. Warner, Mary Mapes Dodge, Laurence Hutton, Dean Sage—peace to their ashes! ashes! hallowed ashes.! period mended to an exclamation point ashes! Susy is in error in thinking Mrs. Dodge was not there at that time; we were her guests. Susy is in error in thinking Mrs. Dodge . . . guests. Susy is in error in thinking Mrs. Dodge . . . guests. Susy is right in error in thinking Mrs Dodge . . . guests. Susy is in error in thinking Mrs. Dodge . . . guests. We arrived at nightfall, dreary from a tiresome journey; but the dreariness did not last. Mrs. Dodge had provided a home-made banquet, and the happy company sat down to it, twenty strong, or more. Then the thing happened which always happens at large dinners, and is always exasperating: everybody talked to his elbow-mates elbow-mates elbow-mates elbow-mates and all talked at once, and gradually and gradually and gradually and gradually raised raised raising raisinged raised their voices higher, and higher, and higher, in the desperate effort to be heard. It was like a riot, an insurrection; it was an intolerable volume of noise. Presently I said to the lady next me— me— me me— me— “I will subdue this riot, riot, riot. riot., riot, I will silence this racket. There is only one way to do it, but I know the art. You must tilt your head toward mine and seem to be deeply interested in what I am saying; I will talk in a low voice; then, then, not in then, then, just because our neighbors won’t be able to hear me, they will want want want ‘want’ underscored want to hear me. me. me. As I mumble along you will find that other people’s talk will become disjointed; next it will stop. me. If I mumble long enough—say two minutes—you will see that the dialogues will one after another come to a standstill, and there will be silence, not a sound anywhere but my mumbling.” mumbling.” mumbling.” mumbling.” Then in a very low voice I began: “When I went out out down out out to Chicago, eleven years ago, to witness the Grant festivities, there was a great banquet on the first night, with six hundred ex-soldiers present. The gentleman who sat next me was Mr. Medill, proprietor of the Chicago Tribune Medill, proprietor of the Chicago Tribune Medill, proprietor of the Chicago Tribune Medill, proprietor of the Chicago Tribune X. X. ‘leave out’ written in the margin X. X. . He was very hard of hearing, and he had a habit common to deaf people of shouting his remarks instead of delivering them in an ordinary voice. He would handle his knife and fork in reflective silence for five or six minutes at a time and then suddenly fetch out a shout that would make you you me almost you you jump out of the United States.” the United States.” my clothes.” the United States.” the United States.” By this time the insurrection at Mrs. Dodge’s table—at least that part of it in my immediate neighborhood—had died down, and the silence was spreading, couple by couple, down the long table. I went on in a lower and still lower mumble, and most impressively— “During one of Mr. Medill’s Medill’s Medill’s Medill’s X. X.’s X. X.’s mute intervals, a man opposite us approached the end of a story which he had been telling his elbow-neighbor elbow-neighbor elbow-neighbor elbow-neighbor . He was speaking in a low voice—there was much noise—I was deeply interested, and straining my ears to catch his words— words— words— words—, words, stretching my neck, holding my breath, to to straining to to hear, unconscious of everything but the fascinating tale. I heard him say, say, say, say, ‘At this point he seized her by her long hair—she shrieking and begging—bent her neck across his knee, and with one awful sweep of the razor——’ razor——’ razor——’ razor——’” single quotation mark mended to double razor—’ “ ‘HOW “ ‘HOW “HOW DO YOU LIKE CHICA-A-AGO!!!’ ” CHICA-A-AGO!!!’ ” CHICA-A-AGO?”!!!” CHICA-A-AGO?”!!!” CHICA-A-AGO?!!!” That was Medill’s Medill’s Medill’s Medill’s X. X.’s X. X.’s interruption interruption contribution interruption , hearable at thirty miles. miles. yards.miles. miles. By the time time time that time that time I had reached that place in my mumblings Mrs. Dodge’s dining room dining room dining-room was so silent, so breathlessly still, that if you had dropped a thought anywhere in it you could have heard it smack smack hitsmack smack the floor.This was tried. I well remember it. M.T., Oct., ’06. floor.* footnote: *This was tried. I well remember it. M. T., Oct., ’06. floor.* This was tried footnote: *Note This was tried. M. T. I well remember it. □ M. T., Oct., ’06. symbol for an em space floor.* footnote: This was tried. I well remember it. □ M. T., Oct., ’06. symbol for an em space floor.* footnote: This was tried. I well remember it.—M. T., October, ’06. When I delivered that yell the entire dinner company jumped as one person, and punched punched bumpedpunched punched their heads through through againstthrough through the ceiling, damaging it, for it was only lath and plaster, and it all came down on us, and much of it went into the victuals and made them gritty, but no one was hurt. ceiling, damaging it, for it was only lath and plaster, and it all came down on us, and much of it . . . hurt. ceiling., ceiling, damaging it, for it was only lath and plaster and all came down on us, and much . . . hurt. ceiling ceiling., ceiling, damaging it, for it was only lath and plaster, and it all came down on us, and much of it . . . hurt. Lyon transferred the sentence from TS1 ribbon; SLC inserted the comma, ‘it’, and ‘of it’ ceiling, damaging it, for it was only lath and plaster, and it all came down on us, and much of it . . . hurt. Then I explained why it was that I had played that game, and begged them to take the moral of it home to their hearts and be rational and merciful thenceforth, merciful thenceforth, merciful, thenceforth, merciful thenceforth, and cease from screaming screaming screaming, screaming no typed comma visible screaming in mass, and agree to let one person talk at a time and the rest listen in grateful and unvexed peace. They granted my prayer, and we had a happy time all the rest of the evening; evening; evening.; period mended to a semicolon evening; I do not think I have ever had a better time in my life. life. life. (1890) date typed in the margin and deleted in ink life. This was largely because the new terms enabled me to keep the floor—now that I had it—and keep the floor—now that I had it—and not in keep the floor—now that I had it—and keep the floor—now that I had it—and do all the talking myself. I do like to hear myself talk. Susy has exposed this in her Biography of me. Biography of me. biography. bBiography. of me. Biography of me. Dean Sage was a delightful man, yet in one way a terror to his friends, for he loved them so well that he could not refrain from playing practical jokes on them. We have to be pretty deeply in love with a person before we can do him the honor of joking familiarly with him. Dean Sage was the best citizen I have known in America. It takes courage to be a good citizen, and he had plenty of it. He allowed no individual and no corporation to infringe his smallest right and escape unpunished. He was very rich, and very generous, and benevolent, and he gave away his money with a prodigal hand; but if an individual or a corporation a corporation a corporation corporation infringed a right of his, to the value of ten cents, he would spend thousands of dollars’ worth of time and labor and money money patiencemoney money and persistence on the matter, and would not not never never not not lower his flag until he had won his battle battle battle, battle or lost it. He and Reverend Reverend Rev. Joe Twichell Joe Twichell Joe Twichell Joe Twichell Mr. Harris Mr. Harris had been classmates in college, and to the day of Sage’s death they were as fond of each other as a pair of sweethearts. a pair of sweethearts. a pair of sweethearts. a an engaged pair. of sweethearts. an engaged pair. It follows, without saying, that whenever Sage found an opportunity to play a joke upon Twichell, Twichell Twichell, Twichell Twichell, Twichell Twichell, Twichell Harris, Harris Harris, Harris was sure to suffer. 1873 1873 (’73) not in In ’73, when Reverend Reverend Rev. Henry Ward Beecher was being tried in Brooklyn, the luster of his name name name, and the national interest in the scandal involved in the trial trial trial, brought Congregational clergymen to Brooklyn from all over America, and kept the Brooklyn streets populous with clerical coats and clerical white cravats as long as the trial lasted. Twichell went there to help watch the trial, and of course was a guest in the Sage mansion. Twichell and Sage would walk down the street daily daily daily with arms locked—Twichell of course wearing the costume that advertised his sacred office to all spectators—and whenever they got within earshot of a group of clergymen Sage would burst out with an impassioned irruption of profanity, profanity, profanity, words of a highly gamey character profanity, words of a highly gamey character, Lyon transferred the revision; SLC probably canceled it when he decided to omit the passage slap Twichell on the back, and say approvingly, “Your very remark, remark, words, remark, Dominie, and you never said a truer thing in your life! life! life.! period mended to an exclamation point life. ” Along about 1873 1873 that time that time 1873 1873 Sage fell a victim to an attack of dysentery attack of dysentery attack of dysentery attack of dysentery illness revised in pencil in an unidentified hand; revision requested by CC illness which reduced him to a skeleton, and defied defied which defied which defied defied all the efforts of the physicians to cure it. He He Sage He went to the Adirondacks and took Twichell Twichell Twichell Twichell Harris Harris with him. Sage had always been an active man, and he couldn’t idle any day wholly wholly wholly wholly away in inanition, but walked every day to the limit of his strength. One day, toward nightfall, the pair the pair they they pair the pair came upon a humble humble wretchedhumble humble log cabin which bore these words painted upon a shingle: “Entertainment for Man and Beast.” They They The pair They pair They were obliged to stop there for the night, Sage’s strength being exhausted. They entered the cabin, cabin, cabin, cabin and found its owner and sole occupant there, a rugged and sturdy and simple-hearted man of middle age middle age middle-age middle age . He cooked supper and placed it before the travelers travelers travelers travellers travellers —salt junk, boiled beans, corn bread corn bread corn-bread corn bread and black coffee. Sage’s stomach could abide nothing but the most delicate food, therefore this banquet revolted him, and he sat at the table unemployed, while Twichell Twichell Twichell Twichell Harris Harris fed ravenously, limitlessly, limitlessly, limitlessly, limitlessly, gratefully; for he he Twichellhe he had been chaplain in a fighting regiment all through the war, and had kept in perfection the grand and uncritical appetite and splendid splendid prodigioussplendid splendid physical vigor vigor adventurevigor vigor which those four years of tough fare and activity had furnished him. Sage went supperless to bed, and tossed and writhed writhed squirmedwrithed writhed all night upon a shuck mattress that was full of attentive and interested corn-cobs corn-cobs corn-cobs corn-cobs . In the morning Joe Joe Joe Joe Harris Harris was ravenous again, and devoured the odious breakfast as as as as contentedly contentedly contentedly, contentedly and as delightedly as he had devoured its twin the night before. Sage sat upon the porch, empty, and contemplated the performance and meditated revenge. Presently he beckoned to the landlord and took him aside and had a confidential talk with him. He said, “I am the paymaster. What is the bill?” “Two suppers, fifty cents; two beds, thirty cents; two breakfasts, fifty cents—total total total total, a dollar and thirty cents.” Sage said, “Go back and make out the bill, bill, bill, bill bill and fetch it to me here here here here on the porch. Make it thirteen dollars.” “Thirteen dollars! Why Why Why Why, it’s impossible! I am no robber. I am charging you what I charge everybody. It’s a dollar and thirty cents, and that’s all it is.” “My man, I’ve got something to say about this as well as you. It’s thirteen dollars. You’ll You’ll You’ll You’ll make out your bill for that, and you’ll take take take ‘take’ underscored take it, too, or you’ll not get a cent.” The man was troubled, and said, said, said, said, “I don’t understand this. I can’t make it out.” “Well, Well, Well, Well, I understand it. I know what I am about. It’s thirteen dollars, and I want the bill made out for that. There’s There’s There’s is There’s no other terms. Get it ready and bring it out here. I will examine it and be outraged. You understand? You understand? You understand? You understand? I will dispute the bill. You must stand to it; you it; you it.; You it. You must refuse to take less. I will begin to lose my temper; you must begin to lose yours. I will call you hard names; you must answer with harder ones. I will raise my voice; you must raise yours. You must go You must go You must Go You must go into a rage—foam at the mouth, if you can; insert insert insert insert some soap, soap, soap, soap to help it along. Now go along and follow your instructions.” The man played his assigned assigned assigned assigned part, part, part, part, and played it well. He brought the bill and stood waiting for results. Sage’s Sage’s Sage’s Sage’s face began to cloud up, his eyes to snap, and his nostrils to inflate like a horse’s; then he face . . . he worked up his temper and face . . . he face . . . he broke out with— “Thirteen dollars! Thirteen dollars! Thirteen dollars?! ‘Thirteen dollars!’ underscored Thirteen dollars! You mean to say that you charge thirteen dollars for these damned inhuman hospitalities of yours? Are you a professional buccaneer? buccaneer? robber? buccaneer? buccaneer? Is it your custom to—— to—— to—— to— ” The man burst in with spirit: burst in with spirit: broke in and saidburst in with spirit: burst in with spirit: “Now Now Now Now, Now, I don’t want any more out of you—that’s a plenty. The bill is thirteen dollars, dollars, dollars, dollars and you’ll pay pay pay ‘pay’ underscored pay pay it—that’s all. A all. A all; a. A corrected on the typewriter all; a couple of characterless adventurers, bilking their way adventurers, bilking their way adventurers, roaming bilking their way adventurers roaming bilking their way adventurers bilking their way through this country and attempting to dictate terms to a gentleman! a a A a a gentleman who received received has received received you supposing you were gentlemen yourselves, whereas in my opinion hell’s hell’s hell’s is hell’s full of—— of—— of—— of— ” Sage broke in— “Not [¶] “Not ¶“Not [¶] “Not another word of that!— that!— that!— dash retraced that!— that!— I won’t have it. I regard you as the lowest down lowest down lowest down lowest-down thief that ever—— ever—— ever—— ever— ” “Don’t “Don’t The Man. “Don’t “Don’t you use that word again! again! again.! period mended to an exclamation point again! By —— By —— By —— By ——, Lyon transferred the revision and Munro added the comma By ——, I’ll take you by the neck and——” Twichell Twichell Twichell Twichell Harris Harris came rushing out, and just as the two were about to grapple he pushed himself between them and began to to to talk and to implore— “Oh Oh Oh Oh, Dean, don’t, don’t! don’t! don’t! ‘don’t!’ underscored don’t ‘don’t’ underscored don’t —now now now now, Mr. Smith, control your yourself! yourself!, don’t——” yourself! Oh, think of your family, Dean!—think what a scandal——” Oh . . . scandal——” Oh . . . scandal——” Oh . . . scandal—” But they burst out with maledictions, imprecations, maledictions, imprecations, maledictions, imprecations, against each other maledictions, imprecations and all the hard names they could dig out of the rich accumulations of the rich accumulations of the rich accumulations of the rich accumulations of their educated educated not in educated educated memories, and in the midst of it the man shouted, shouted, shouted, shouted— “When gentlemen gentlemen gentlemen ‘gentlemen’ underscored gentlemen come to this house, I treat them as as as ‘as’ underscored as gentlemen. When people come to this house with the ordinary Christian Christian Christian not in appetites of gentlemen, I charge them a dollar and thirty cents for what I furnished you; but when a man brings a hellfired hellfired hell-fired marked to close up hell-fired Famine here that gorges a gorges a eats a engulfs eats a eats a gorges a barrel of pork and four barrels of beans at two sittings—” sittings—” sittings—” sittings—” Sage broke in, in, in, in, in a voice that was eloquent with remorse and self-reproach, in . . . self-reproach, in . . . self-reproach, in . . . self-reproach, “I [¶] “I ¶] “I no ¶ “I never thought of that, and I ask your pardon; pardon; pardon.; period mended to a semicolon pardon; I am ashamed of myself and of my friend. I . . . friend. I . . . friend. I . . . friend. Here’s your thirteen dollars, and my apologies along with it.”