7 October 1907 Dictated October October Oct. 7, 1907 The manner in which Mr. Clemens is reported in Tuxedo to have declined and accepted a dinner invitation—Copy of postal from Sioux Falls relating little girl’s remarks about Mr. Clemens’s picture—Copy of postal from Mr. Twichell in regard to poem by Omar Khayyam. It often pains me to note how this world is given to slander: that beautiful Mrs. M. was here yesterday afternoon, and she told a story which she said was on its rounds in Tuxedo Park; according to this story, I was called up on the telephone, a couple of weeks ago, by a lady for whom I have a strong but concealed aversion, aversion, aversion, (concealed as I had supposed) who said, “Mr. Clemens, can you come and dine with us to-night to-night to-night ?” “Oh I am unspeakably sorry, but I have an engagement which is imperative.” “Make it to-morrow night, then.” “It’s too bad, and I am ever so sorry, but I have to be in New York to-morrow night.” “Well then what’s the matter with Thursday?” After a thoughtful pause— “Oh hell, I’ll come to-night!” This whole legend is a lie on its face, by verdict of circumstantial evidence, which is the best of all testimony. Miss Lyon noticed a couple of discrepancies and pointed them out: she said, “Mr. Clemens never goes to the telephone at all, and he never uses profane language in the presence of ladies whom he does not like.” That purified my reputation, as far as Mrs. M. is concerned, but of course it remains a wreck as far as regards the rest of the community. However, I must take the bitter along with the sweet, like the rest of our race. The bitter comes oftenest, perhaps, but when the sweet comes, in its turn, it heals our wounds and satisfies us with ourselves again. I was still suffering from that anecdote this morning, but the mail has brought me a healer, and once more I am glad to be alive. It comes from a very far country: Sioux Falls, S.D.Sept. 25. Dear Sir: The following true incident occurred in Sioux Falls: a little four-year-old girl who was one day visiting at the house of a friend, sat for a long time thoughtfully gazing at a picture of Mark Twain which stood on the mantel-shelf; at length, folding her hands and raising her eyes reverently, she said, “We have got a picture of Jesus like that, too, only ours has more trimmings on it.” Here is another post-card. This one is out of the long ago, and shows age in all its aspects. How strange it seems that there was once a time when I had never heard of Omar Khayyam! The postmark is Hartford, and the card is from Reverend Reverend Rev. J. H. Twichell, and is addressed “Mark Twain. City.” Wed. morning. Read (if you haven’t) the extracts from Omar Khayyam on the first page of this morning’s Courant. I think we’ll have to get the book. I never yet came across anything that uttered certain thoughts of mine so adequately. And it’s only a translation. Read it, and we’ll talk it over. There is something in it very like the passage of Emerson you read me last night, in fact identical with it in thought. Surely this Omar was a great poet. Anyhow he has given me an immense revelation this morning. Hoping that you are better, J. H. T. Our Post-Office Department is still something of a lame duck, in our day, as as but as it was was was much lamer then. The postmark on this card gives the date December 22, and stops there, neglecting neglecting refraining neglecting to furnish the year. The year must have been 1879, I think—indeed I feel almost sure of it, by persuasion of several circumstances of that time which remain in my memory. When the card arrived, I had already read the dozen quatrains in the morning paper, and was still steeped in the ecstasy of delight which they had occasioned; no poem had ever given me so much pleasure before, and none has given me so much pleasure since; it is the only poem I have ever carried about with me; it has not been from under my hand for twenty-eight years.