22 December 1908 Dictated December 22, 1908 Dictated December 22, 1908 Dictated Dec. 22, 1908. Dictated December 22d, 1908. A Capable Humorist | By Mark Twain The mails bring me many interesting letters, and now and then a remarkable one. I save the remarkable ones, and shall by and by distribute them through my Autobiography, in order that my far-off future readers may have a chance to enjoy them as much as I have enjoyed them myself. I have now received a remarkable a remarkable a remarkable a remarkable one from Holland which I want to share with the public at once; I cannot bring myself to inter it for years in the cold-storage vault with those others. In the storage vault vault vaullt vault are a number of letters from foreigners—letters remarkable only or mainly for their quaint and comic and startling English; but while the present one blazes with those merits it possesses others besides, as the reader will presently admit. It is from a born humorist, and his humor is so natural to him that not even the stubborn plate-mail plate-mail plate-mail plate-mail of his book-acquired English is able to keep it in; it breaks its way out, and flashes through the chinks chinks cracks chinks . He is so hampered by his imperfect speech-vehicle that he seldom succeeds in saying exactly what he is trying to say, but no matter, he always says his say felicitously, always quaintly and deliciously, and often brilliantly often brilliantly often even brilliantly often brilliantly ; and to be brilliant in a tongue not one’s own is a rare feat indeed. We hear of it sometimes, but we don’t personally encounter it. I think his English is perfectly charming, and I perceive that the personality back of it is charming, charming, charming, charming too. It appears that his “bundle” (his book of humorous matter) fails of a market in Holland. Let him turn it into English—doing the translating with with wis with corrected miswriting with his own hand and allowing no one to mar it with corrections—and give it a trial and chance the result. and chance the result. on American soil. on American soil. and chance the result. and chance the result. I mean a free, free, free, free unlabored, offhand translation, with no scrapings and filings and polishings, and other strivings after perfection. I think humor-lovers would humor-lovers would we should we should humor-lovers would humor-lovers would enjoy the book and like the author. Observe what Irwin has done, done, done, done with his delightful Japanese schoolboy. That schoolboy’s English is manufactured, yet how forceful it is, how hard it hits, how straight to its mark it goes. And all so innocently unconscious—apparently—of the havoc it is distributing, under the gentle protection of the broken speech. Mr. Bausch’s Bausch’s Bausch’s Bausch’s broken speech could be effective, too, I think. Here is his letter: Here is his letter: I shall ask him to try it. (Insert the letter here.) I shall ask him to try it. Here is his letter: Most honourated and venerated Sir. It will probably wunder you very much to receive from a Netherlander a letter that is written in so bad English as this and only the circumstance that I am in reality not a true Netherlander, but that the blood of about the half of the European nations streams pure through my veins, may be able to explain somewhat this in each other case completely incomprehensible, few recommandable and totally unnational absence of knowledge of languages. Nevertheless I have done all that is possible to make this letter as good as I might. WhenGerman for if.—M. T. When* footnote: *German for if.—M. T. When When* footnote: *German for if.—M.T. I had been a true, pure Netherlander, then should I have succeeded without daught in so brilliant manner, that after years this letter should be considered by the linguists of your country as the most trusted source for the knowledge of your language, like she was in this time, but yet, now it is I, who has reached with my lessons in languages only this result that I am able to make myself ridiculous in three different languages for three different strangers—what a true Netherlander never can happen of course!—who has written the letter, I fear that that that not in the result will be somewhat less favourable favourable favourable favorable . I hope however that it will be you possible to conceive something about it and I do an appeal on your kindness and concurrence in in in on this regard. But might it happen, in spite of all this consecration as well from your as from my side, that my presentiment appeared to be juste, and that you meand after conscientious study, that this letter looks more a composition in a by me for this occasion with purpose discovered dead language, or in a hitherto unknown dialect of the Esperanto or Volapück, so hope I nevertheless that you will not deprive me from the glory which me belongs therefore and that, when you dispatches dispatches dispatches despatches this letter to the conductor of the rubric “Informations about the present abode of dead languages,” or to them of the rubric “Observation of the natural growing crooked of artificial languages” of one of your local newspapers, my name will remain married with this work, so that I I I I I acquire always something with this letter. And now the proper reason for this letter. I ought to say that this is in reality a somewhat difficult question. I avow openhearted that I would have preferred to avoid this point, safe then in a note, placed at the underend of this letter, which should then have treated about all sorts of interesting questions, which had nothing to do with the affair self, but the fear that perhaps you will read only the half of this letter brought me back of this purpose and does me give the explaining of the question. You will also, even when you throw away this letter on the half, have read and have consented or refused the half of that that that not in what I have to write and to ask to you. In both cases is the half of that what I wish to beg you you you you you corrected mistyping you me also allowed at least not refused; I hasard also nothing, gain always somewhat and beg you also frankly: will you be so kind to write a preface for my first bundle of sketches? That is a very strange demand indeed!, indeed!, indeed!, indeed! will you probably remark. For how can I write a preface for a book that I not have read and for a man that I never have seen? I approve that this ask, when you put it indeed, would have some good reason under some circumstances, but yet, now the affair for what I ask you a recommandation recommandation recommandation reccommandation is only a book and not a new mark of sausages, safety matches, an an an and automatic self-slaughter-machine self-slaughter-machine self-slaughter-machine self-slaughter machine or something of this art, has this ask this reason not at all. Why should it be necessary to know and to answer for the contents of a book, before one could recommend recommend recommend recommand it? Have you then ever caused yourself an inflammation of your entrails by the reading of a book, like that can happen you with sausages? Did you then seen your children descends in the grave, the one after the other, like the guarantated safety matches had caused without doubt, because you had given them a book? From such things has nobody even heard, is not it? And then besides: since what time makes one name as author, artist or actor by his works? That happens certainly never, is not it! it! it! it? That is certainly contrary to the usance and good manners, is not it! it! it! it? That would certainly be a divergence of the good, good, good, good old customs that never would be approved by the public and with which one who tried to introduce it would provoke the people and excite his hate and rage! And how good has the existing customs not worked till to day to day to day to-day ! How many statesmen, statesmen, statesmen, statesmen who had else been delivered to the oblivion, do not thank their glory and their statue to the circumstance, that their wife could not endure their company and trickled away? How many singers, actors etc. are not very known, even famous, and have yet done in the service of their art nothing more than to wrench themselves the ancle, to lose their diamonds or to be arrested, all this with more sensibility then then then than they ever had reached in their art! I myself know somebody, from a kind that you surely know also, who is praised by everybody and who are attributed all the virtues and endowments which are imaginable, only on account of the good case he has known to acquire a little belly German pun on his own name. belly* footnote: *German pun on his own name. belly belly* footnote: *German pun on his own name. (Bauchchen) like we call that. “From “From From “From him have I the best hopes,” hopes,” hopes, hopes,” says one in society’s, when the happy owner of this belly goes away. “That “That That “That is a worthy man! One who has endowments! One who will bring it far!” far!” far! far!” And all they who speaks with so much appraising about this man, look with admiration to this remarkable, prosperitous belly, when they speak also, come under the influence of this strong argument for his good qualities and speaking from the man, they attribute him unconscious all that what they admire with so much enthusiasm enthusiasm enthusiasm inthusiasm in his belly. And is this not an irreproachable, irreproachable, irreproachable, irreproachable beautiful manner to acquire the esteem and admiration of his countrymen? No, most honourated Sir, I have the unshaken conviction that you will not maintain this argument of ignorance with my work, but that on the contrary it will be you a pleasure, pleasure, pleasure, pleasure to acquire the admiration and the agreement of the whole civilized civilized civilized civilised world by the writing of a beautiful, beautiful, beautiful, beautiful thorough preface, which has nothing to do with my book. And what a beautiful task is such a preface as for the rest! What a large field for all sorts of interesting contemplations offers she you! It has striked me, that since the author of this bundle conceived the project for it, the statistics indicate a notable diminution of crimes against the laws on the shoe of the beasts for draught can you say per exempel, criticising the affair of a large, large, large, large economic point of view. Farther, returning to subjects of more local nature, you can remark that since the publishing of this work was resolved, the paving-stones of your domiciliary town are used less more on the outside and much more on the foot which is resting on the earth, so that the publishing of a work like this signifies for penurious communities a notable sparing in the expenses for the pavement and all such things more which you can say much more nice, juste juste juste juste, and with more penetration then then then than they here are here are here are are here written, of course. But why does that man not ask such a preface to a well known well known well known well-known humorist of his own country? Is that not somewhat suspected?, will you possibly remark to yourself. Most honourated and venerated Sir, I avow openhearted that I annulate the whole admiration which I ever have showed for your logical power, your sagacity, your spirited look on all problems which are possible and that I retract all the declarations which I ever have done about this, when you put this ask indeed. For what should I beginn with such a preface, preface, preface, preface that better could be calculated calculated cal-led cal-culated calculated a funeral sermon? Supposed that Netherland possesed a humorist, supposed even a well known well known well known well-known humorist, stronger: supposed that that dat dat that that you yourself were a Netherlandth humorist, do you mean that I should venture to appear with a preface of you? I should not dare it when my life were me precious! I should admirate you in this case as much as I do it now, yes, yes, yes, yes perhaps still more! For I should think: such a bad fate has the poor man not deserved! And I should regret at most that your were not born under more gracefull circumstances: that you were not a native of Greenland, not a citizen of the Nord Pole, not a man of Mars (the planet), but above all: that you were not an American. And this cannot wunder you indeed! For it is you known of course, how much admiration my countrymen cherish cherish cherish sherish cherisch for all the races, nations and peoples which I have enumerated and above all: how much admiration they cherisch for your countrymen. Coming from your independent America, where narrow-mindednesses like these are unknown of course, you must have been striked double so strong on your travels through our country—you rambles it at at at not in all sides and know know know knows all his corners is not it? An American who does not run through our country is not a true American, as we learn on the school!—by the great predilection for all that is from you and your countrymen you saw here. Or do not you know more with what a surprise each Netherlander used to listen, when you, you, you, you speaking about the beautiful things that you had seen on your travels, told him somewhat from the curiosities of his own country, from which he never had heard till this day. In your own country is that quite otherwise of course. Your countrymen travel in the foreign only then, when they know their own country their own country the own their own country their own their country their own country as good as their own house, but here is this just the contrary and does not exist anybody who knows exactely what there is to be seen in his native country. And stronger and stronger: when one says that it has indeed somewhat that is remarkable, they do not believe it at once, safe when it is an American who says that, for in this case is it the truth, of course! And do you mean that I should dare to appear with a preface of a countryman under such circumstances? Sir, I do not think about it! Even when [if] when [if] when when [if] I could obtain for my bundle a preface from the most orthodox and old fashioned clergyman which Netherland possesses then should I not yet think about it, though this is the best recommandation for all kinds of things that can be haved by us! No most honourated Sir, only with a preface of you I can reach my aim. A recommandation of you, a humorist, the most famous humorist of your country, the most famous humorist of America and my success is certain! When I can show to an editor this, then undoubted is my bundle printed. Without my sketches, that is possible. But may hap are these then printed on the coverside (Umschlag), when no advertisements are received and when the editor is a generous man. Or possibly does he place them on loose papers between the pages of your preface, in variation with the announcements and with the intention to make the reading of these a few less monotonous. But in each case is the aim reached. And should you refuse to grant your support therefore? Most honourated Sir, I cannot believe that. I do an appeal on your kindness! Your dollarkings sustain our painters for buying their pictures, from which they else never were delivered and even in a much greater quantity then then then than ever has been painted by them and do you like to stay behind your countrymen? No most honourated Sir, you will not do that! I am sure about that! But it will be you an honour to make possible by your your your your your powerful support the edition of a book, book, book, book that else by no one of my countrymen would be desired, by no body would be bought and that no one on earth would have costed a moment of joy. Have I gained the pleading? Ah! it it it It is true! I have forgotten something! You know literal nothing about my person! But person! [¶] But person! [¶] But person! But what can I say you that is able to awake faith and confidence? When I tell you pretty things from myself, then do you think: the man lies of course!, and I do not obtain my preface. When I confess on the other hand honestly my bad deeds en en en and qualities, then do you think: I have immediately thought that there was something wrong with this man and who knows what he yet keeps back. And I do not obtain my preface not at all. Nevertheless I do not like to say no anything and in order to show you that my will is good, I communicate you, that my length is 1.61 meter, my complexion is bleach bleach bleach black , eyes blue, hairs flaxen, and I bear a beard. Nose common, ears common, mouth common, one fore-tooth fails. Bears black dress of dubious stuff, black hat, marked C.W., white nether garments, marked J.A.B., C.B. C.B. C.B. C.B., and P.B., save the collar which is dirty and the pocked handkerchief which is marked K.S.D. Boots black, weared off and in a great time not polished. Has in his pockets a pipe, a notebook without leafs, an ivory haft of an Indian sword and presumptively his neck-cloth. It is not much like like like like, you see, but I do not know more that is guarantated sure. It is the description that the police gave of me eight years ago, when I had gone away on a New Years evening to gratulate an old friend but had stand away about twenty four twenty four twenty four twenty-four hours, because a dried ditch, the place where I had seen him the last time, was freezed now and I not had could understand in what manner such an important mutuation can can had can had can can happen in the two or three month that had passed since. And might you find that all this is not sufficient to trust me in the affair from which is the question, then, most honourated Sir offer I docily my good name and beg you to agree me that what I ask you for for for for, disdain; I am with joy well pleased therewith. Receive in each case the declaration of my most respectful sentiments and admiration Your dediated reader Pieter Bausch. (nom de plume “Peet Boetser.” Pieter . . . Boetser.” Pieter Bausch. (nom de plume: Peet Boetser) Pieter Bausch (nom de plume: Peet Boetser) (nom de plume “Peet Boetser.” Pieter Bausch, (nom de plume “Peet Boetser.” P.S. When When When When, perhaps you have to make a present of some weared off or superfluous humours, I recommend myself politely for sending. P.S. My wife who had read this letter, says that you will problably send me a physician and not a preface and that you will believe that all this is foolishness. And your preface would help us so good through the winter, she says. I have answered her of course that this physician, when [if] when [if] when when [if] he came soon, still could draw me a bad tooth, for though there is something in her words that is just, the prosperity and peace of our home forbid me to avow this. Nevertheless I will not wholly neglect her observation observation observation observation, and declare also that all that that that not in I have written here is deep earnest, especially that what belongs the preface. Farther that it wood wood wood would be very kind from you were so officious and that this preface, this preface, this preface, his preface when [if] when [if] when when [if] you came to day or to morrow in the neighbourhood of our house threatens you with the grateful cries of a whole family. We do not have children, so that you will be obliged to renounce of their voice, at our regret, but the parents have very good lungs on the other hand. That is it almost what my wife said, but translated by me in pathetic stile and therwith therwith therwith therewith does she have her will too. too. too. [¶] P.S. On the moment that I will despatch this letter do I add still this, likewise on pressing of my wife. She desires that I shall translate somewhat of my sketches for you, but I say her that you will take this ill. Nevertheless she insists and being obliged to consent her wish do I end with the following scheme: Humoristic | Fantastic | No | Other | previous four words enclosed in a brace and labeled ‘Sketches’ | Translated into: Netherlandth (Dutch). | French. | German | English. [¶] To strike out what not is desired, please! Attention! From the translations is especially the first recommanded! too. entire third postscript deleted too. 9 Dec. ’08 ’08 ’08 ’08. Amsterdam Amsterdam Amsterdam Amsterdam, Vrolikstraat 333III Vrolikstraat 333III Vrolikstraat 333III Vrolikstraat 333 Vrolikstraat 333. Holland Holland Holland Holland.