1 November 1907 Dictated November November Nov. 1, 1907 Clipping from morning paper criticising President Roosevelt’s connection with the recent panic—Mr. Clemens discusses the panic—Copy of letter which Mr. Clemens wrote to the Knickerbocker Trust Company Company Co. —Incident which occurred in the home of Mr. L. (Mr. Clemens’s lawyer) in the Knobs of East Tennessee, showing how primitive the natives are to this day. It is like a breath of fresh air in the Black Hole of Calcutta to at last come across a sane remark about our insane President. I find it in the morning papers: NEW HAVEN, Conn., Oct. 31.—President Roosevelt was in one breath pilloried and the next defended before the Economic Club of this city to-night. John W. Alling, a Connecticut lawyer, accused him of causing the panic last week, and F. R. Agar of this city also scored him. Henry Clews, the New York banker, took up the cudgels in his defense, and asserted that unless America ceased to be controlled by the money power the country would go the way of the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah and of the Roman Empire. Mr. Alling said: “Roosevelt is immensely popular with the masses. Mr. Roosevelt is essentially like the old Crusade leaders, powerful, arrogant, conceited, with a halo of heavenly inspiration, a born leader, bound by no party ties, himself the ‘whole thing,’ in search of valiant deeds, claiming a supernatural power to detect and uncover and punish ‘the wealthy malefactor.’ “Followed, as he thinks, by the whole people, he is the most dangerous foe to constitutional liberty that has ever existed in this country. The financial panic calls for an opinion as to how how haw how far ‘my policies’ are responsible for it. He has been conscious that he was making a prodigious stir, and warned that it would bring on a panic. He has noticed how general market values, the true index of credit, would rise in the hope that he would listen to the suggestions made to him and would slump on hearing the same old warlike trumpet blasts. “President Roosevelt is alone responsible for raising this railroad rate question. It was not a plank in the Republican platform. In the Senate it did not command a majority of the Republicans. In the Senate Committee a minority of the Republicans minority of the Republicans minority of the Republicans minority of the Republicans ‘minority of the Republicans’ underscored and the Democrats combined and this Rooseveltian measure was intrusted to the Democrat Senator Tillman. Tillman. Tillman. centered Result of Rate Law. Tillman. “The overwhelming popularity of President Roosevelt jammed it through. Now what has been the result? It was patent to everybody from the instant it appeared likely that the power to fix rates was to be taken from the railroads and put into the hands of Commissioners in the interest of the shippers, Commissioners, every one of whom could be removed at once by Mr. Roosevelt for what he might deem inefficiency or neglect. “The value of railroad properties began to decline and their credit to disappear. In the meantime, the business of the country enormously increasing, and just at the time when the railroads needed capital by the hundreds of millions to equip themselves for the work to be done, their power to raise the necessary capital vanished.” This has been a strange panic. It has not strongly resembled any other panic in the history of the country. The panic to which we have long been accustomed, is a tempest, a cyclone, a hurricane, which sweeps away values and lays industries waste much as the cyclone fells forests and leaves towns a tumultuous confusion of wreckage; but this new panic is of a new sort; it is a still panic, a noiseless panic, a smothered panic; it makes no noise, there are no hysterics, no frenzies; it is not like a storm; it is like a blight, a paralysis; it is as if the business activities of our eighty millions of people had suddenly come to a standstill, leaving everybody idle, frightened, wondering. The conditions make one think of a mighty machine which has slipped its belt and is still running by previous and perishing impulse, but accomplishing nothing. There has not been a single important failure in the financial world. There are no crashes, no thunder-bursts, no earthquakes; there is nothing but a creepy and awful stillness, and an atmosphere charged with apprehension. The phrase “laying off” has become common, almost wearisomely so. We hear of this and that and the other vast concern laying off a thousand men, two thousand men, three thousand men—and this makes us familiar with the conditions obtaining among the multitude of millionaire industries of the country; but there is a far wider and more disastrous laying off that does not find its way into the newspapers; this is the laying off that is going on under the surface, all over the land—the discharging of one employee out of every three in all the humble little shops and industries from one end of America to the other—a laying off which is not to be counted by thousands, as in the case of the giant industries, but by hundreds of thousands, with an aggregate reaching into millions, and making the laying off by the great companies companies Companies a trifle, and insignificant by comparison. The four-servant families are getting along with three now; the three-servant families are getting along with two; the two-servant families are getting along with one; the one-servant families are getting along without any. The day governess with six pupils has lost three of them; the day governess with three pupils has lost all of them; counter-clerks, male and female, have been discharged in shoals; there is not a single trade in the country that has not reduced its force and imperiled the bread and butter of one family or a thousand. A blight has fallen everywhere, and Mr. Roosevelt is the author of it. Last week a prodigious and universal crash was impending, and but for one thing would have happened: the millionaire “bandits” whom the President is so fond of abusing abusing abusing◇ in order to get the applause of the gallery gallery galleriesy , stepped in and stayed the desolation. Mr. Roosevelt promptly claimed the credit of it, and there is much evidence that this inebriated nation thinks he is entitled to it. The great financiers saved every important bank and trust company in New York but one—the Knickerbocker Trust Company. That one had no friends, and was obliged to suspend, with obligations amounting to forty-two millions—mainly deposits. No one will lose by the temporary suspension, but twenty-two thousand depositors are more or less inconvenienced by it. Its Board of Blunderers have been shilly-shallying for a week, and trying to invent ways to save its stockholders from an assessment. Of course I had to be a depositor in the only concern that got into trouble—it was just my luck. I had fifty-one thousand dollars there. I feel hurt, I feel abused; I feel a deep sympathy for that man who— I think I have spoken of that Young Young yYoung Christian long ago, in an earlier chapter of this Autobiography—I don’t remember; however, this was the incident: I was to talk to a lot of Young Men’s Christian Associations in the Majestic Theatre Theatre Theater on a Sunday afternoon. Miss Lyon and I entered the place by the stage door and sat down in a box and looked out over a desert expanse of empty benches—wondering. Miss Lyon presently went to the main entrance in the other street, to see what the matter was; just as she started the Young Young yYoung Christians came pouring in like a tidal wave; she plowed through the wave, and by the time she reached the main door the place was full and the police, mounted and on foot, were struggling with a multitude of remaining Young Young yYoung Christians and keeping them back. The doors were being closed against the people. There was one last man, of course—there always is. He almost got his body into the closing door, but was pushed back by a big officer. He realized that his chance was gone. He was mute for a moment, while his feelings were rising in him, then he said: “I have been a member of the Young Men’s Christian Association in good standing for seven years and never got any reward for it, and here it is again—just my God damned luck!” luck!” luck!” I do not feel as profane as that—still I sense the situation, and I sympathize with that man. The directors directors Directors of the Lincoln Trust Company were hard pressed by their depositors, but they promptly put their one page and all but two lines of the following page (about 420 words) are missing Mr. L. was here last night. He is a well-known young New York lawyer, and is prosperous, and rising rapidly to distinction. He told me about his early life, and I found it peculiarly interesting because he was born in the Knobs of East Tennessee, that remote and primitive region where my father and mother lived eighty years ago, along with Colonel Mulberry Sellers, and whose life and surroundings I have described in the first chapter of the book called “The Gilded Age.” I perceived by Mr. L.’s L.’s L’s account of his own young life there that the conditions have not changed in a single detail from what they were eighty years ago. The people are shrewd and smart, but untaught, unlettered, and ignorant almost beyond imagination. They know nothing about the outside world; they are not interested in it, they are entirely indifferent regarding its concerns; they have no books and they cannot read; they are religious, but after their own fashion; they have no churches; they have no denominations. Mr. L.’s father is eighty years old and can neither read nor write; his first wife could neither read nor write; his second wife was an educated woman, a school-teacher, and came there from afar; but but but after twenty years’ association with the people around her her grammar was as atrocious as theirs, and her phrasing and her pronunciation as barbarous. In the family there were fifteen boys and four girls. The father wanted his boys to remain on the farm, according to custom—a custom which had hardly known a break in a century previously—but they disappointed him; all his boys went away to seek their fortune elsewhere, as fast as they reached young-manhood young-manhood youngmanhood . Mr. L., who is now about thirty-five years old, went to Texas when he was twenty. He earned a dollar or two a week there in humble capacities for a while, and meantime educated himself; then he came to New York City and hung out his shingle as a lawyer, and very soon dropped into a remunerative practice practice practise . When he was presently satisfactorily established in New York he paid his boyhood home a visit. This was about seven years ago. He had just met and had had long conversations with one of the victorious Boer generals, and as his father had been a Confederate captain in our Civil War, he counted upon thrilling him with the Boer general’s stirring adventures in the South African war. Now then, I arrive at a curious illustration of the profound interest which those primitives down there take in their local affairs, and the pallid interest which they take in anybody else’s. Mr. L., with the family grouped about him, began his tale, and as he dashed off he dashed off he dashed off picture after picture of battle and retreat, of narrow escape, of blood and carnage in the South African veldt veldt velt —he grew excited, and poured out his great story with a fire and eloquence which compelled his own admiration and which he supposed was compelling the admiration of everybody present; but just in the midst of one of his stirring and spectacular pictures his old Uncle William reached out and gave his aged father’s leg a vigorous pinch and said, in a tone of strong excitement and gratification, “Jimmy, Nip’s come back! He come over the mountains all by hisself yiste’day and Jake’s got him again!” The amazement, the astonishment, the delight that flashed over the faces of the family was like a sunburst. Mr. L. was smitten dumb with humiliation to see his great war tale snubbed, extinguished, abolished, in this heartless way. He saw one of his brothers clap his hands to his chest as if to restrain a spasm of some kind, and then rise and retreat from the place. Mr. L. followed him, and found him outside, supporting himself against a woodpile and laughing the soul out of his body and the teeth out of his head. Mr. L. said, “What is it? What is there to laugh about? I think it’s shameful! What is Nip? Who is Nip? and why has the return of this prodigal thrown the whole family into such indecent hysterics of joy and gratitude?” The brother said, “I had to laugh—I’ve got to laugh. The change from the tribe’s mild interest in your war to the dynamite explosion of interest in a local matter of real real real ‘real’ underscored interest, of unfeigned interest, of sublime and colossal interest—that’s what I’m laughing about. that’s what I’m laughing about. that’s what I’m laughing about. Nip is a frowzy old no-account gray horse, fifteen years old, that belongs to Jake Utterback Utterback Utterbachk . Two years ago he wandered off and was never seen again, nor heard of, until yesterday evening, when he came loafing back over the mountains. Uncle William was dying to be the first to tell the family the great news, and he was afraid all the time that somebody would come in with it and get ahead of him. He waited as long as he could for you to get through with your war, and he couldn’t have waited another minute or he would have died in his tracks. The news about Nip is flying all over this region for miles, and there isn’t a man or a woman that hears it that doesn’t put down work and play, and duty and pleasure, and everything else, and rush off to try to be the first to tell it to somebody else.” No, the Knobs have not changed. No, the Knobs have not changed. No, the Knobs have not changed.