11 April 1906 Wednesday, April 11, 1906 Mr. Frank Fuller and his enthusiastic launching of Mr. Clemens’s first New York lecture—Results not in fortune but in fame—Leads to a lecture tour under direction of Redpath—Clipping in regard to Frank Fuller, and Mr. Clemens’s comments—Olive Logan clipping and Mr. Clemens’s comments—Mr. Clemens’s feeling toward suicides. I am not glancing through my books to find out what I have said in them. I refrain from glancing through those books for two reasons; first—and this reason always comes first in every matter connected with my life—laziness. I am too lazy to examine the books. The other reason is—well, let it go. I had another reason, but it has slipped out of my mind while I was arranging the first one. I think it likely that in the book called “Roughing It” I have mentioned Frank Fuller. But I don’t know, and it isn’t any matter. When Orion and I crossed the continent in the overland stage-coach, 1861 1861 (1861) in the summer of 1861, we stopped two or three days in Great Salt Lake City. I do not remember who the Governor of Utah Territory was at that time, but I remember that he was absent—which is a common habit of Territorial Territorial territorial Governors, who are nothing but politicians who go out to the outskirts of countries and suffer the privations there in order to build up States and come back as United States Senators Senators senators . But the man who was acting in the Governor’s place was the Secretary of the Territory, Frank Fuller—called Governor, of course, just as Orion was in the great days when he got that accident-title accident-title accident-title accident-title through Governor Nye’s absences. Titles of honor and dignity once acquired in a democracy, even by accident and properly usable for only forty-eight hours, are as permanent here as eternity is in heaven. You can never take away those titles. Once a justice of the peace for a week, always “judge” “judge” “judge” “judge” afterward. Once a major of militia for a campaign on the Fourth of July, always a major. To be called colonel, purely by mistake and without intention, confers that dignity on a man for the rest of his life. We adore titles and heredities in our hearts, and ridicule them with our mouths. This is our democratic privilege. Well, Fuller was Acting Governor, and he gave us a very good time during those two or three days that we rested in Great Salt Lake City. He was an alert and energetic man; a pushing man; a man who was able to take an interest in anything that was going—and not only that, but take five times as much interest in it as it was worth, and ten times as much as anybody else could take in it—a very live man. I was on the Pacific coast coast Coast thereafter five or six years, and returned to the States by the way of the Isthmus in January ’67. 1867 1867 (’67) In the previous year I had spent several months in the Sandwich Islands for the Sacramento Union, and had returned to San Francisco empty as to cash but full of information—information proper for delivery from the lecture platform. My letters from the Islands had given me a large notoriety—local notoriety. It did not extend eastward more than a a one a a hundred miles or so, but it was a good notoriety to lecture on, and I made use of it on the platform in San Francisco and amassed twelve or fifteen hundred dollars in the few nights that I labored for the instruction and amusement of my public. Fifteen hundred dollars was about half—the doorkeeper got the rest. He was an old circus man and knew how to keep door. When I arrived in New York I found Fuller there in some kind of business. He was very hearty, very glad to see me, and wanted to show me his wife. I had not heard of a wife before; had not been aware that he had one. Well he showed me his wife, a sweet and gentle woman with most hospitable and kindly and winning ways. Then he astonished me by showing me his daughters. Upon my word, they were large and matronly of aspect, and married—he didn’t say how long. Oh, Fuller was full of surprises. If he had shown me some little children, that would have been well enough, and reasonable. But he was too young-looking young-looking young looking a man to have grown children. Well, I couldn’t fathom the mystery and I let it go. Apparently it was a case where a man was well along in life but had a handsome gift of not showing his age on the outside. Governor Fuller—it is what all his New York friends called called called called him now, of course—was in the full storm of one of his enthusiasms. He had one enthusiasm per day, and it was always a storm. He said I must take the biggest hall in New York and deliver that lecture of mine on the Sandwich Islands—said that people would be wild to hear me. There was something catching about that man’s prodigious energy. For a moment he almost convinced me that New York was wild to hear me. I knew better. I was well aware that New York had never heard of me, was not expecting to hear of me, and didn’t want to hear hear ever hear hear of me—yet that man almost persuaded me. I protested, as soon as the fire which he had kindled in me had cooled a little, and went on protesting. It did no good. Fuller was sure that I should make fame and fortune right away without any trouble. He said leave it to him—just leave everything to him—go to the hotel and sit down and be comfortable—he would lay fame and fortune at my feet in ten days. I was helpless. I was persuadable, but I didn’t lose all of my mind, and I begged him to take a very small hall, and reduce the rates to side-show prices. No, he would not hear of that—said he would have the biggest hall in New York City. He would have the basement hall in Cooper Institute, which seated three thousand people and there was room for half as many more to stand up; and he said he would fill that place so full, at a dollar a head, that those people would smother and he could charge two dollars apiece to let them out. Oh, he was all on fire with his project. He went ahead with it. He said it shouldn’t cost me anything. I said there would be no profit. He said, “Leave said, [¶] “Leave said no ¶ “Leave said, [¶] “Leave that alone. If there is no profit that is my affair. If there is profit it is yours. If it is loss, I stand the loss myself, and you will never hear of it.” He hired Cooper Institute, and he began to advertise this lecture in the usual way—a small paragraph in the advertising columns of the newspapers. When this had continued about three days I had not yet heard anybody or any newspaper say anything about that lecture, and I got nervous. “Oh,” nervous. [¶] “Oh,” nervous. no ¶ “Oh,” nervous. [¶] “Oh,” he said, “it’s working around underneath. You don’t see it on the surface.” He said “Let it alone alone alone alone alond , now, let it work.” Very well, I allowed it to work—until about the sixth or seventh day. The lecture would be due in three or four days more—still I was not able to get down underneath, where it was working, and so I was filled with doubt and distress. I went to Fuller and said he must advertise more energetically. He said he would. So he got a barrel of little things printed that you hang on a string—fifty in a bunch. They were for the omnibuses. You could see them swinging and dangling around in every omnibus. My anxiety forced me to haunt those omnibuses. I did nothing for one or two days but sit in ’buses ’buses buses and travel from one end of New York to the other and watch those things dangle, and wait to catch somebody pulling one loose to read it. It never happened—at least it happened only once. A man reached up and pulled one of those things loose, said to his friend, “Lecture friend, [¶] “Lecture friend no ¶ “Lecture friend, [¶] “Lecture on the Sandwich Islands by Mark Twain. Who can that be, I wonder”—and he threw it away and changed the subject. I couldn’t travel in the omnibuses any more. I was sick. I went to Fuller and said, “Fuller, said, [¶] “Fuller said no ¶ “Fuller said, [¶] “Fuller there is not going to be anybody in Cooper Institute that night, but you and me. It will be a dead loss, for we shall shall will shall shall both have free tickets. Something must be done. I am on the verge of suicide. I would commit suicide if I had the pluck, and the outfit.” outfit.” outfit.” outfit.” I said, said, said, said, “You must paper the house, Fuller. You must issue thousands of complimentary tickets. You must must must ‘must’ underscored must do this. I shall die if I have to go before an empty house that is not acquainted with me and that has never heard of me, and that has never traveled in the ’bus ’bus bus and seen those things dangle.” “Well,” he said, with his customary enthusiasm, “I’ll attend to it. It shall be done. I will paper that house, and when you step on the platform you shall find yourself in the presence of the choicest audience, the most intelligent audience, that ever a man stood before in this world.” And he was as good as his word. He sent whole basketsful of complimentary tickets to every public-school teacher within a radius of thirty miles of New York—he deluged those people with complimentary tickets—and on the appointed night they all came. There wasn’t room in Cooper Institute for a third of them. The lecture was to begin at half past half past half-past seven. I was so anxious that I had to go to that place at seven. I couldn’t keep away. I wanted to see that vast vacant Mammoth Cave and die. But when I got near the building I found that all the streets for a quarter of a mile around were blocked with people, and traffic was stopped. I couldn’t believe that those people were trying to get into Cooper Institute, and yet that was just what was happening. I found my way around to the back of the building and got in there by the stage door. And sure enough, the seats, the aisles, the great stage itself, were were was packed with bright-looking human beings raked in from the centres centres centers of intelligence—the schools. I had a deal of difficulty to shoulder my way through the mass of people on the stage, and when I had managed it and stood before the audience, that stage was full. There wasn’t room enough left for a child. I was happy, and I was excited beyond expression. I poured the Sandwich Islands out onto onto on to those people with a free hand, and they laughed and shouted to my entire content. For an hour and fifteen minutes I was in paradise paradise Paradise . From every pore I exuded a divine delight—and when we came to count up we had thirty-five dollars in the house. Fuller was just as jubilant over it as if it had furnished the fame and the fortune of his prophecy prophecy prophesy . He was perfectly delighted, perfectly enchanted. He couldn’t keep his mouth shut for several days. “Oh,” days. [¶] “Oh,” days. no ¶ “Oh,” days. [¶] “Oh,” he said, said, said “the fortune didn’t come in—that didn’t come in—that’s all right. That’s coming in later. The fame is already here, Mark. Why, in a week you’ll be the best known man in the United States. This is no failure. This is a prodigious success.” That episode must have cost him four or five hundred dollars, but he never said a word about that. He was as happy, as satisfied, as proud, as delighted, as if he had laid the fabled golden egg and hatched it. He was right about the fame. I certainly did get a a a a working quantity of fame out of that lecture. The New York newspapers praised it. The country newspapers copied those praises. The lyceums of the country—it was right in the heyday of the old lyceum lecture system—began to call for me. I put myself in Redpath’s hands, and I caught the tail-end of the lecture season. I went West and lectured every night, for six or eight weeks, at a a one a a hundred dollars a night—and I now considered that the whole of the prophecy prophecy prophesy was fulfilled. I had acquired fame, and also fortune. I don’t believe these details are right, but I don’t care a rap. They will do just as well as the facts. What I mean to say is, that I don’t know whether I made that lecturing excursion in that year or whether it was the following year. But the main thing is that I made it, and that the opportunity to make it was created by that wild Frank Fuller and his insane and immortal project. All this was thirty-eight or thirty-nine years ago. Two or three times since then, at intervals of years, I have run across Frank Fuller for a moment—only a moment, and no more. But he was always young. Never a gray hair; never a suggestion of age about him; always enthusiastic; always happy, happy, happy, happy, and glad to be alive. Last fall his wife’s brother was murdered in a horrible way. Apparently a robber had concealed himself in Mr. Thompson’s room, and in the night had beaten him to death with a club. A couple of months ago I ran across Fuller on the street, and he was looking so very, very old, so withered, so mouldy mouldy moldy , that I could hardly recognize him. He said his wife was dying of the shock caused by the murder of her brother; that nervous prostration was carrying her off, and she could not live more than a few days—so I went with him to see her. She was sitting upright on a sofa, and was supported all about with pillows. Now and then she leaned her head for a little while on a support. Breathing Breathing Breathing Breathing was difficult for her. It touched me, for I had seen that picture so many, many times. During two or three months Mrs. Clemens sat up like that, night and day, struggling for breath. When she was made drowsy by opiates and exhaustion she rested her head a little while on a support, just as Mrs. Fuller was doing, and got naps of two minutes’ minutes’ minutes or three minutes’ duration. I did not see Mrs. Fuller alive again. She passed to her rest about three days later. The thing which has brought Frank Fuller into my mind is this half-column of matter which I have scissored from this morning’s paper. I never get a chance to hunt among my old note-books for texts for this autobiography, for the reason that every day the newspaper furnishes me a couple of dozen, and I never can catch up at this rate. STRANGE SEQUEL TO BLACKMAILING CASE. Louis R. Fuller Learns for First Time that He Is Not Rich Dr. Fuller’s Son. When Louis R. Fuller, Yale graduate and society favorite in New York and Boston, appeared in the Centre Street Police Court yesterday as complainant against Homer Hawkins, No. 101 West Eighty-eighth street, whom he accused of attempted blackmail and assault, he learned for the first time that he is only the adopted son of Dr. Frank Fuller, millionaire president of the Health Food Company, No. 61 Fifth avenue. Hawkins Hawkins “Hawkins had sent a letter to Louis R. Fuller, demanding $500 under penalty of disclosing confidential information to a Mr. Rowbotham, whose daughter is engaged to marry Fuller. His arrest followed. When Hawkins was arraigned yesterday, Magistrate Whitman held him in $2,500 bail on the blackmail charge and in an additional $500 bail on a charge of carrying concealed weapons. Mrs. Ellen Faxon, mother of Homer Hawkins, was in court to aid her son. It was the first time she had seen Louis R. Fuller, her brother by adoption. She begged him not to press the charge. “Don’t you know that he is of Dr. Fuller’s own flesh and blood?” she exclaimed, “and that you are his uncle only by adoption?” Louis R. Fuller did not know at first what to say. It was the first intimation he had ever had that he was not Dr. Fuller’s own son. Then looking the woman straight in the eye he said: “Your son had no business to do what he did; I am going to press the charge.” Mrs. Faxon’s Story. When Mrs. Faxon was seen by a World reporter at her home, after a futile effort to get bail for her son, she said: “While I do not approve of my boy’s action, when the true facts come out very few persons will blame him for what he did. My father and my mother separated in 1868. Two years later my mother died. I married, and with my husband and an only sister went to California to live. There Homer was born. His father died shortly after his birth. A few years later I married my present husband, Frank Faxon, who is now in Southern California. “Twenty years ago I learned that my father had married Miss Anna Thompson, of Portsmouth, N.H. She was a sister of the late Jacob H. Thompson, who was found murdered in his room in the St. James Hotel. One child was born to them. This child died and a year later a boy, now known as Louis R. Fuller, was adopted. Who he was or where he came from I do not know. “As my boy neared manhood he began to ask about his grandparents. I told him the true story. Three years ago Homer came to New York and visited his grandfather. He then learned that his uncle by adoption was being educated at Yale. From that day to this he has been a changed boy. His grandfather sent him back to California to keep him from meeting Louis. Meets Father After Thirty Years. “When I found myself almost penniless two years ago I went to my father’s summer home at Madison, N.J., and met him for the first time in thirty years. My stepmother told me that New York was not big enough for us both. Since then I have been earning a living as a seamstress. “It made Homer’s heart bleed to think that another was usurping the comfort and love that belonged to us.” Dr. Fuller and his adopted son occupy fine apartments at the Allston, No. 17 East Thirty-eighth street. They were not at home last night. Mrs. Fuller died of nervous prostration last February, never having recovered from the shock following her brother’s death. New York World. That clipping is full of mystery for me. The lady says says says says, “My father and my mother separated in 1868.” It was in the previous year that Fuller showed me his wife—the one that died the other day—and also astonished me with those portly and matronly daughters of his. I seem to gather, now, that there had been an earlier Mrs. Fuller, and that the unexplained daughters were of that vintage. Fuller didn’t tell me he had ever had another wife. I think this lady must be wrong in her dates. I think the separation must have occurred before 1867, and not in 1868. The lady says “separated.” She doesn’t say divorced. Well, let it go. I can’t straighten it out. According to my reading of this account Louis Fuller is not entirely accounted for. But let that go. It is no matter. If he was adopted by Fuller, or by anybody else, it must have been in his infancy—because if the adopter had waited, he would have considered the developed Louis not much of an asset and would have left him for some other speculator. But never mind. Let the whole thing go. It is beginning to tangle my head. The most that I get out of the whole matter is that the Fuller life, like all other lives that climb up into old age or thereabouts, is a tragedy. It is a pity to grow old, because you know that the tragedy is always hanging over you, and if you don’t get out of life by some fortunate accident it will fall on you pretty surely. I wonder how old Fuller is. More than eighty, I imagine—yet he never looked old until lately. I will disengage my mind from this dismal subject and see if I can’t find a cheerfuler one among this morning’s clippings. No, it is a failure. There is nothing very cheerful about the one I hold in my hand. It is headed “Olive Logan has Husband Arrested.” I doubt if I have thought of Olive Logan or encountered her name for a good thirty years and more. She belongs ’way ’way way back yonder in that brief period among the lyceum days, when a new kind of female lecturer invaded the platform. The previous kind had been the Anna Dickinson kind, women who had something to say; and could say it well; women who were full of talent; women who talked straight out of their hearts and could powerfully move an audience with their eloquence. Then came the Olive Logan kind: women who hadn’t anything to say, and couldn’t have said it if they had had anything to say; women who invaded the platform to show their clothes. They were living fashion-plates. All over the country the women filled the lecture halls to look at those clothes, and they brought their husbands along. The men didn’t want to go, but they had to. A woman had to have a name before Redpath would launch her upon the lecture platform. Olive Logan set herself the task of manufacturing a reputation. For a season or two she wrote inane, affected, and valueless stuff for obscure periodicals. As a method of creating fame that proved to be a dead failure. Then she began the most curious—the most curious—well, I can’t think of the word I want—let it go. What she began was this. She married a penny-a-liner (whose name I have forgotten) and he handed around little two-line items amongst the newspapers and got them inserted—like this: “Olive Logan has taken the Hunter mansion at Cohasset for the summer.” Now why should that interest anybody? But it did. There wasn’t any truth in it, but the reader couldn’t know that. He had never heard of Olive Logan, but surely Olive Logan wouldn’t be mentioned in that matter-of-course way unless she was a celebrity, and therefore the reader found himself in the unsatisfactory position of being ignorant of a thing he ought to know. Dear me, Olive Logan couldn’t take the Hunter mansion, or any other mansion. She couldn’t take the Hunter mansion, or any other mansion. She couldn’t not in take the Hunter mansion, or any other mansion. She couldn’t take a shack, shack, shack, shack and pay the rent. Then there would be another item presently: “Olive Logan is at least independent. She has boldly deserted the world-famous Parisian male milliner, Worth, and has ordered her gowns for next season from his new but prosperous rival, Savarin.” That item would flit from paper to paper throughout the United States. Persons reading it would take it for granted that Olive Logan was a celebrated and important person, although he had not been quite aware of it before, so far as he could remember. But that item would impress him, if he was a woman, and do it every time. A person who could boldly desert Worth must be something not far short of a duchess. These items followed each other in procession straight along, week by week, through the year. There was never a word of explanation of who Olive Logan Logan logan Logan might be or of what she had done to earn fame. The items were never of the slightest consequence to any one, since they merely referred to Olive Logan’s clothes and the summer residences she was supposed to take, with now and then an opinion on some subject which she was not acquainted with. These opinions were flung out in the same matter-of-course way that distinguished the items about the clothes: “Olive Logan has expressed the opinion that transcendentalism, even as a Bostonian Bostonian Bostonion Bostonian interest, is passing away.” Now this curious thing actually happened—and I am alive to swear to it—that at the end of this kind of persistent itemizing of this unknown adventuress, Redpath was able to put her on the platform at a hundred dollars dollars dollars not in a night and send her all over this country. She wasn’t worth ten cents a week, but she soared from town to town throughout the United States for three or four or five years, at the regular lecture rate of a hundred dollars a night. She was actually famous. There is no doubt about it. Her name was familiar to everybody. Every man was familiar with Olive Logan’s name; every woman was familiar with it—and there wasn’t a human being in the entire United States who could answer if you asked him him him him, “What is her fame based on? What is it that she has done?” You would paralyse paralyse paralyze a person by asking him that question. He would think for an instant that he could easily tell what her fame rested upon, but just a single second of reflection was sure to convince him that whereas he never had thought of it before, the fact was that he hadn’t any idea in the world who Olive Logan was or what she had done. She had built up a great, a commercially valuable name, on absolute emptiness; built it up upon mere remarks about her clothes and where she was going to spend the summer, and her opinions about things that nobody had asked her to express herself about. It was the emptiest reputation that was ever invented in this world. Of course she couldn’t go to the same town the third time. The first time her house would be filled. The audience would go away aware that they had got nothing whatever for their money. The second time the house would be filled with the rest of the people who hadn’t seen her, but that exhausted that town. There were no more idiots left. The Lyceum Committee of the town would know that as an attraction Olive Logan had ceased to exist. She was not sent for again. And, as I have said, I haven’t heard of Olive Logan for a whole lifetime. And now she turns up in this morning’s paper under that heading, “Olive Logan has Husband Arrested.” OLIVE LOGAN HAS HUSBAND ARRESTED. Famous Lecturer, Authoress and Actress Declares that He Drinks and Neglects Her. Olive Logan, lecturer, authoress, actress, stage beauty of thirty years ago, appeared as a suppliant in the Harlem police court yesterday afternoon. She is sixty-seven years old, white-haired, tottering and very deaf. Magistrate Cornell did not catch her name, but her charming voice and exquisite use of the English language caught his attention. He sent a policeman with her into an adjoining corridor to shout into her ear-trumpet and get her story. “I want a warrant,” said the aged woman, “for my husband, James O’Neill Logan. We live at No. 2568 Seventh avenue. He is always drinking.” The magistrate issued a summons, and when the man was brought to court in the afternoon his condition was so bad that he was ordered into custody until to-day. “We are terribly in debt,” said Mrs. Logan to the reporters. “My husband is employed at Ellis Island, but the saloons get his money, and he often comes home without a cent. We are in danger of being dispossessed. We have no money to buy food. I am so weak with the infirmities of age that I can no longer write. It is only as a last resort that I have appealed to the court.” Magistrate Cornell will make an order in the case to-day. Olive Logan was born in Elmira, N.Y., on April 22, 1839. She gained fame as a writer and lecturer, and in 1872 she was married to William Wirt Sikes, appointed by President Grant Consul to Cardiff, Wales. He died in London in 1883. Mrs. Sikes always clung to her first name. She was a protege of the late Augustin Daly, who trained her for the stage. She wrote “Surf; or, Life at Long Branch,” dramatized Wilkie Collins’s “Armadale” and made a metrical translation of Francois Coppee’s “Le Le La Passant.” Mrs. Logan said James O’Neill was her office boy in London twenty-five years ago. When he grew up he became her secretary. “He came to America with me,” she said, “and we decided to be married, although I was twenty-two years older than he. The first ten years of our married life were a dream of happiness. He is a fine fellow, and I love him still. His drinking has ruined us.” Why, dear me, she was born in Elmira, New York, it appears—the town where my wife was born and where we spent our summers for sixteen years. The town where was also born the first distinctly and rollickingly humorous book that was ever written by an American woman, “The Widow Bedott.” That book was written by a girl eighteen years old. It is now forgotten, but it swept this continent with a hurricane of laughter when it first came out. And here I find the name of that husband of hers, that penny-a-liner without salary or local habitation or name, who did the itemizing and created Olive Logan’s fame. I remember his name perfectly now, William Wirt Sikes. And of course he would be appointed a Consul Consul consul to some part of this planet, because he was not needed in this country. We have certainly furnished this world with whole regiments, battalions, and divisions of ignorant, characterless, and chuckle-headed Consuls Consuls consuls who have exhibited the United States to a wondering foreign public, and who ought not to have had any salary. Nor fees salary. Nor fees salary. Nor fees salary nor fees . They ought to have charged admission—a shilling, say, to foreigners desiring to examine our political product. Olive Logan’s present husband, it appears, is named James O’Neill, and was her office boy in London a quarter of a century ago. She was twenty-two years older than he was. The first ten years of their married life was “a dream of happiness.” He has taken to hard drinking. Well, you see it is another tragedy. You’ve only got to live long enough and your tragedy will arrive. I didn’t think, thirty-five years ago, that the day could ever come when my heart would soften toward Olive Logan, and that I would put my hands before my eyes if she were drowning, so as not to see it; but now I do pity her—I do pity her. Her tragedy has come, and I have to be sorry for her, and I am sorry. If she were drowning I would not look—but I would not pull her out. I would not be a party to that last and meanest unkindness, treachery to a would-be suicide. My sympathies have been with the suicides for many, many years. I am always glad when the suicide succeeds in his undertaking. I always feel a genuine pain in my heart, a genuine grief, a genuine pity, when some scoundrel stays the suicide’s hand and compels him to continue his life. In this morning’s paper, a woman living in California—her husband living in Washington, an employee employee employeé accent added employeé of the Government Government government Government —takes the life of her son, fourteen years old, with gas; tries to die with him; is found on her knees at his bedside, unconscious, nearly gone. The people who thus find her, instead of going out and shutting the door, as I would have done, drag her out of the place and into the fresh air and summon a doctor, and that doctor commits the crime of bringing her back to life, with all that that means for her. Her husband lost to her through the fascinations of some department clerk in Washington; her boy gone out of this world, and happy; nothing left in this world of a penny’s value for her—the tragedy of her life brought upon her when she has not yet reached the tragedy age. And look at that doctor’s comment! He says he “entertains hopes of her recovery.” He ought to be shot. I entertain hopes that to-morrow morning’s paper will bring news that she is on her way to the cemetery, where she can have peace.