[The Rev. Dr. Newman] [The Rev. Dr. Newman] 1885. [The Rev. Dr. Newman] 1885. flush left 1885. flush right on the same line (Newman: Dr. Extract from my note book: April 4, 1885. April 4, 1885. Apl. 4. “April 4, 1885. General General Gen Gen. Grant is still living, living, living, living this morning. Many a person between the two oceans lay hours awake, last night, awake, last night, awake, last night, awake last night listening for the booming of the fire-bells that that that which should speak to the the the a nation in in in (Notebook 23); in thunder-tones in ‘thunder-tones’ deleted on the typewriter; redundant ‘in’ deleted by SLC simultaneous voice and tell it its calamity. The bell-strokes bell-strokes bell-strokes bell strokes are to be thirty seconds apart and there will be sixty-three—the General’s age. They will be striking in every town in the United States at the same moment—the first time in the world’s history that the bells of a nation have tolled in unison, unison, unison, unison— beginning at the same moment and ending at the same moment. moment. moment. moment.” More than once once once, during two weeks, the nation stood watching with bated breath expecting the news of General General Gen. Grant’s death. The family in their distress family in their distress family, in their distress, desired spiritual help help help, and one Rev. Dr. Newman was sent for to furnish it. Newman had lately gone to California where he had got a ten-thousand-dollar ten-thousand-dollar ten thousand dollar job to preach a funeral sermon over the son of ex-Governor Stanford Stanford Stanford , the millionaire, millionaire, millionaire,; comma mended to a semicolon and a most remarkable sermon it was—and worth the money. If Newman got the facts right, neither he nor anybody else—any ordinary human being— being— being— was worthy to preach that youth’s funeral sermon sermon sermon, and it was manifest that one of the disciples ought to have been imported into California for the occasion. Newman came on from California at once, and began his ministration at the General’s bedside; bedside; bed side: and and and, if one might trust his daily reports reports reports, the General had conceived a new and perfect interest in spiritual things. It is fair to presume that the most of Newman’s daily reports originated in his own imagination. Colonel Fred Grant told me that his father was, was, was, in this matter, matter, matter, what he was in all matters matters matters, Redpath inserted the comma and SLC deleted it and at all times—that is to say, perfectly willing to have family prayers going on, or anything else that could be satisfactory to anybody, or increase or increase or increaseing anybody’s comfort in any way; way; way.; but he also said that while his father was a good man, and indeed as good as any man, Christian or otherwise, he was not not not ‘not’ underscored a praying man. Some of the speeches put into General Grant’s mouth were to the last degree incredible to people who knew the General, General, General: since they were such gaudy and flowery misrepresentations of that plain-spoken man’s utterances. About the 14th or 15th of April, April, April, Rev. Rev. Reverend Mr. Mr. Mr. Newman reported that that that, Redpath inserted a comma and SLC deleted it upon visiting the General General General, Redpath inserted a comma and SLC deleted it in his sick chamber, chamber, chamber, the General pressed his hand and delivered himself of this astounding remark: “Thrice have I been in the shadow of the valley of death and thrice have I come out again.” General Grant never used flowers of speech, and dead or alive and dead or alive and, dead or alive, he never could have uttered uttered uttered such rot— anything like that, either as a quotation or otherwise. About that time I came across a gentleman in the railway train who had been connected with our embassy in China during the past sixteen years years years, and was now at home on leave of absence, absence, absence,; comma mended to a semicolon and he told me something about Newman. He said that once, when General Grant was President, President, President Newman wanted to travel about the world a little and he was given the post of Inspector of Consulates. It was a salaried position and the salary was paid out of an appropriation set apart for that purpose. Whenever an inspector’s time expired, expired, expired, whatever might be left unexpended of that appropriation appropriation appropriation, had to be turned in to the Treasury. This Secretary of Legation tried to make me understand understand understand that and how there was some crookedness about Newman’s expenditures, expenditures, expenditures, but I am not able to call call call it to mind in what the crookedness consisted, consisted, consisted,; comma mended to a semicolon so I will not make the attempt. The Secretary was mainly interested in showing showing showing, not that Newman was a knave but that he was simply simply simpley an ass. He said he came out to China and proceeded to investigate the legation, and hauled it vigorously over the coals, and was getting along very satisfactorily with his work work work, when the American Minister spoiled it all by calling his attention to the fact that the legation was not a consulate and did not come within the jurisdiction of his powers. There was a social club there, composed of American ladies and gentlemen, who met occasionally to discuss things, and Newman showed a good deal of anxiety to get an invitation to address it and to furnish an essay for one of their discussions. His hints were not favorably received. So he compacted them into a clear form: in fact he invited himself. In introducing him the chairman almost apologized to the company and said in substance company and said in substance company, and said, in substance, that Rev. Rev. Reverend Mr. Mr. Mr. Newman had asked permission to address the club. This chilly introduction didn’t distress the essayist a bit apparently. He opened his remarks with a graceful reference to the urgency which had been brought to bear upon him to address the club and which he could not politely decline. The Secretary of Legation may have exaggerated the case, but case, but case, but, from what I can gather gather gather, Dr. Newman is really about that kind of a man.