Gerhardt Gerhardt 1884. (September: at the farm at Elmira.) Gerhardt 1884. (September . . . Elmira.) flush left 1884. centered on the same line Gebhart. ¶ September . . . Elmira. Gebhart Gerhardt arrived home from Paris,—leaving his wife and his little boy behind him. He had found living much more expensive at Paris than it had been in J. Q. A. Ward’s day. Consequently Consequently Consequently, Ward’s estimate of $3,000 $3,000 $3000 for five years had fallen woefully short. Gerhardt’s Gerhardt’s Gebhart’s expenses for three years and a half had already amounted to $6,000 $6,000 $6000 . There was nothing for him to do—so he made a bust of me me me, in the hope that it might bring him work. The times were very hard hard hard, and he was not able to get anything to do. do. do (October.) (October.) flush left 1884. centered on the same line Gebhart. flush left on a new line October) About this time Gerhardt Gerhardt Gebhart heard that a competition was about ready to begin for a statue of Nathan Hale, the Revolutionary spy and patriot patriot patriot, caught and hanged by the British. This statue had been voted by the Connecticut Legislature and the munificent price to be paid for it was $5,000 $5,000 $5000 . The speech which ex-Governor Hubbard had made in advocacy of the proposition was worth four times the sum. The The A The committee in whose hands the Legislature had placed the matter consisted of Mr. Mr. Mr Coit, a railroad man, of New London, London, London, who was a modest, sensible, honorable, worthy gentleman, who who who, while wholly unacquainted with art and confessing it, art and confessing it, art, (and confessing it,) was willing and anxious to do his duty in the matter. Another committeeman was an innocent ass by the name of Barnard, Barnard, Barnard who knew nothing about art and in fact about nothing else, and if he had a mind was not able to make it up on any question. As for any sense of duty, that feature was totally lacking in him—he had no notion of it whatever. The third and last committeeman was the reigning Governor of the state, Waller, a smooth-tongued liar and moral coward. Gerhardt Gerhardt Gebhart designed and made a clay Nathan Hale Hale Hale, and offered it for competition. A salaried artist of Mr. Batterson, a stone cutter, designed a figure and placed it in competition, and so also did Mr. Woods, an elderly man who was sexton of Mrs. Colt’s private church. Woods had some talent but no genius and no instruction in art. The stone cutter’s stone cutter’s stone-cutter’s man had the experience and the practice that comes from continually repeating the same forms on hideous tombstones—robust prize-fighting angels, mainly. The figure and pedestal made by Gerhardt Gerhardt Gebhart were worthy of a less stingy price than the Legislature had offered, offered, offered: decenter companionship in the competition competition competition, and and and of a cleaner and less stupid committee. In the opinion of William C. Prime and Charles D. Warner, Gerhardt’s Gerhardt’s Gebhart’s was a very fine work of art and these men would not have hesitated to award award award it the contract to him. The Governor looked at the three models models models, and said that that that, as far as he could see see see, Gerhardt’s Gerhardt’s Gebhart’s was altogether the preferable design. Mr. Coit said the same. But it was found impossible to get the aged Barnard Barnard Bernard to come to look at Gerhardt’s Gerhardt’s Gebhart’s model. He offered offered offered, among other excuses excuses excuses, that he didn’t like to give a statue to a man who still had his reputation to make—that the statue ought to be made by an artist of established reputation. When reputation. When reputation.— When asked what artist artist artist, of established reputation reputation reputation, would make a statue for $5,000 $5,000 $5000 he was not able to reply. It was difficult difficult difficult, for some time time time, to find out what the real reason was for this old man’s delay, but it finally came out that Mrs. Colt’s money and influence were at the bottom of it. Mrs. Colt was anxious to throw that statue into the hands of her sexton sexton sexton, in some way or other. She wrote a letter to the Governor, in which she argued the claims of her sexton, and it presently became quite manifest that the Governor found himself in an uncomfortable position, for the reason that he had characterized the sexton’s attempt as exceedingly poor and crude, crude, crude, and had also stated stated stated, quite distinctly distinctly distinctly, that of the three models Gerhardt’s Gerhardt’s Gebhart’s and was ready to vote in that way. This incredible puppy actually described Gerhardt’s Gerhardt’s Gebhart’s design to the sexton and advised him to make a new design for competition—which he did; did; did: and he used Gerhardt’s Gerhardt’s Gebhart’s design in it! The Governor had no more sense than to tell Gerhardt Gerhardt Gebhart that he had done this thing. Taking no ¶ Taking ¶ Taking the whole thing round round round, it has been the most comical competition for a statue the country has ever seen. It was so so as so ludicrous and so so as so paltry—in every way contemptible contemptible contemptable —that I tried to get Gerhardt Gerhardt Gebhart to retire from the competition and make a group group statue group for me to be called the Statue Committee to present portraits of these cattle and mousers over a clay image. I said I would write a history of the Nathan Hale committee to go with the statue statue statue, and I believed he could put it in terra cotta and make some money out of it. But he did not wish to degrade his art in gratifying his personal spite and he declined to do it. it. it It is customary customary customary, everywhere else, I believe, for such a committee to specify what is the latest date for the offering of designs designs designs, and also a date when a judgment on them shall be rendered, rendered, rendered but this committee made no limit—at least in writing. Their policy evidently was to give Mrs. Colt’s sexton time enough to get up a satisfactory image—no matter how long that might take— take— take and then give him the contract. Waller failed to be reelected Governor, Governor, Governor, but was appointed Consul-General to London London London, and sailed on the 10th 10th tenth of May May May, with the Nathan Hale statue still undecided, undecided, undecided,; comma mended to a semicolon although, although, although, as he had a personal favor to ask of a friend of Gerhardt’s, Gerhardt’s, Gebhart’s, just before sailing sailing sailing, he said “Grant “Grant “Grant me the favor and I will pledge my word that the Nathan Hale business shall be settled before I sail.” sail.” sail.” Gerhardt Gerhardt Gebhart kept his clay image wet and waiting three or four months months months, and then he let it crumble to pieces pieces pieces, because the the the prospects of the design seemed to be as far away as ever.