8 December 1908 Dictated at Stormfield, December 8 December 8 Dec. 8th , 1908 Speaking of burglars, here is a curious coincidence. I will lead up to it by inserting here a letter which I received about a week ago from the Connecticut Penitentiary. It is from the worst and toughest of our two burglars—Williams—who has just begun a nine-year term there for his midnight adventures in my house and with the sheriff on the train. CONNECTICUT STATE PRISON. Wethersfield, Conn. Sunday Nov. 29. 1908 Name, Henry Williams, Register No., 2176 Grade, 2d. To Mr. Dr. S. L. Clemens, L.L.D. No. , Street. Town, Redding Conn.Fairfield County. State, (Personal Matter) Write only on Ruled Lines. The prisoner must confine himself to family or business matters of his own. own. own own. No news of other prisoners or reference to criminal matters must be made, and no allusions to prison matters or prison officials will be mailed or received. No letters mailed to General Delivery in large cities. To The Person Receiving This Letter:—Do not visit friends on Sunday, Fourth of July, Fast Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas. Prisoners in the First Grade may receive one visit every two weeks: in the Second Grade, once a month. No visits permitted to prisoners while in the Third Grade or when tickets have been taken. Friends may send prisoners, by mail, suspenders, handkerchiefs, comb, hair brush, tooth brush, slippers—but nothing else. Friends may bring a small quantity of fruit when visiting a prisoner. First grade prisoners may write once a week. Second grade prisoners may write once a month; third grade prisoners cannot write at all. Certain weekly newspapers and magazines will be admitted, but no dailies. All mail inspected. Address prisoner’s mail with full name and registered number. Friends may visit prisoners on Friday, as above noted. No express packages received. All letters to and from United States must be written in English ________________________________________________________ Most Honorable Sir: In order to have a clear conscience and peaceful mind, which is so essential to human life, and as I firmly believe in your “genuine gentleness, honest symphaty, brave humanity and sweet kindliness” I take the boldness and ask of you the following respectful and humble request. Since you know the weakness and frailty, the many struggles and temptations, and miseries of human life, better than most men, I humbly come to you and beg that you will forgive me and trust, that you will not be harsh with a repentant and regretful sinner and bear no malice or ill-will towards me. We are all human and therefore apt to make mistakes and fall into temptations and times come into our lives “when necessity knows no law” (to borrow one of your own expressions) and we perceive, when it is too late, what a terrible mistake we have made. But it is only: “Old age and experience hand in hand, lead us to death and make us understand; That after a search so painful and so long, our whole life had been in the wrong.” Since all is over, I cannot help to make mention of “a certain class of people” who did all in their power to prejudice and bias me against the long-eared, thoughtless and slow-minded public at large, and put me down as a low, hard-hearted, vicious and dangerous evil-doer, in order to gain notoriety and satisfy their pityful political ambition.— But, “Father forgive them, they know not what they did.”— Being my first offence against the law, I have asked for a fair and square trial; but it was denied. I have pleated for mercy and clemency but received none. “Oh what a fatal time when society casts off and consummates the irreparable abandonment of a thinking being!” It is not for myself and my hard estate, that I am pleading; but for those I love and left behind and who are dear and true to me and whom I have so shamefully disgraced. Perhaps like me they struggle with, each feeling of regret; but it is my place to repent and ask you to forgive. It is in your power, most venerable sir, to relieve the painful and oppressed heart of a repentent sinner and have compassion with him. For: “I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety nine just persons, that need no repentance.” (Luke. 15–7.) My sole consolation lies in the verb “forgive.”— Your “Tramp Abroad” gives me much pleasure and—pain, for it recalls many scenes of my boyhood and one who saw “Alt Heidelberg” knows “warum ich traure in des Lebens Blüthezeit.” In the hope, that my appeal will not be rejected, not for my sake but for those I love, I once more implore your compassion an clemency and with a thankful and regretful heart I conclude these few and simple lines, giving you the repeated assurance of my gratitude and sincerety. I remain, most venerable sir, very respectfully yours, Henry Williams. When I began to read this letter, I also began to be touched. touched. touched typed off page I could feel my heart softening. But the process was suddenly interrupted. There was something about the tone of the letter that seemed vaguely, dimly, remotely familiar: it was as if I had read such a letter ages ago, or had dreamed it; also I had the feeling that there was something unpleasant about that ancient experience. Without definitely knowing why, I began to chill towards the writer of this present letter. Presently the feeling dawned upon me that I had come in contact with this kind of a letter before, at some time or other in the past. My mental machinery went on automatically digging deeper and deeper into my memory, and at last it uncovered the source of my present fancies and imaginings. I now remembered that I had once read such a letter; I also remembered that I had written about it in some book of mine. I did not know which book it was, but I could recall the very look of the room in which I wrote the book. Not the whole book, but the last two chapters of it, one of which chapters contained that reminiscence. I occupied that room only a fortnight but I remembered that it was during that fortnight that I wrote the chapter which contained that matter. That gave me the date—1882. This enabled me to identify the book—“Life “Life Life on the Mississippi” Mississippi” Mississippi —since I was busy with no other book during that year. I took down the volume and instituted a search; in chapter 52 I found what I was after. In that chapter there is a letter from an ostensible criminal who has acquired religion, to a brother rascal who is serving a term in a penitentiary for burglary. The letter is the work of apparently a phenomenally phenomenally phenominally ignorant person, also an elaborately sweet and simple-hearted simple-hearted simple hearted and permanently and perfectly converted person. The Reverend Joseph H. Twichell Twichell Twitchell brought that letter to me in that old day and tried to read it to me, but its moving pathos broke him down and he could not finish it. I tried to read it and it broke me down. Copies of it were distributed around among the clergy, and they read it to their congregations, sobbing, and the congregations wept all through the ordeal. By and by by bye it was discovered that the letter was a humbug; it was written by the jailed convict himself, to himself; and that its ostentatious illiteracy was a pretense pretense pretence , for the rascal was an educated rascal. With this light upon the matter I read the letter again, this time without breaking down, and was amazed that so glaring a fraud, so transparent a fraud could ever have deceived anybody possessed of any vestige of insight or intelligence. I have re-read re-read reread that old letter once more, ten minutes ago; and again I have marveled marveled marvelled that it deceived Twichell Twichell Twitchell and those other clergymen and me. Its bad spelling is preposterously, extravagantly, impossibly bad; bad but not ingeniously bad; sillily, stupidly, inartistically bad; as a piece of sham manufacture it is grotesquely poor and lubberly; even the housecat housecat house-cat ought to have perceived at once that it was the product of a humbug. The coincidence referred to above is this: the name used by the writer of that ancient letter was Williams. The name used by the writer of the letter to me from the penitentiary a week ago is Williams; the ancient Williams was a burglar, this present Williams is a burglar; the ancient Williams was sent up for nine years and the same thing happened to this present Williams two or three weeks ago: the tone of sweet repentance and pious sentimentality observable in the ancient letter pervades this present one. I wonder if penitentiary people always get to feeling like that. Two years ago Robert Fulton Cutting told me that there are men who make their living writing pathetic letters for prisoned convicts and that sometimes these writers do not find it necessary to write fresh letters for new clients but are content to use a really good and moving letter over and over again merely changing names and places to fit new circumstances and new clients. It may be that one of these experts helped to write the letter quoted above—I feel reasonably sure that he furnished the pathos, the sentimentality, the repentance, repentance, repentance the piety, the humility and the Biblical and other quotations, for I cannot conceive of our Williams having any of this kind of merchandise in stock. He is a low and coarse and hard-hearted creature in all his fibres and sentiment and piety and repentance and humility are distinctly out of his line. The last thing he said upon leaving in charge of the officers for the penitentiary penitentiary Penitentiary was, that when he got out of prison he would hunt down his fellow convict and kill him.