8 February 1906 Thursday, February title February Feb. 8, 1906 Susy Susy (Susiey Susy Clemens’s Biography Biography biography , continued—Romancer to the children—Incident of the spoon-shaped drive—The burglar alarm does its whole duty. Along one side of the library, in the Hartford home, the bookshelves joined the mantelpiece—in fact there were shelves on both sides of the mantelpiece. On these shelves, and on the mantelpiece, stood various ornaments. At one end of the procession was a framed oil painting oil painting oil painting oil-painting of a cat’s head, at the other end was a head of a beautiful young girl, life-size— life-size— life-size, life-size,— life-size— called Emmeline, because she looked just about like that— she looked just about like that— that wasn’t her her name Hobby canceled the redundant ‘her’; ‘wasn’t’ originally ‘wasn’t’; underscore canceled by SLC that wasn’t her name— that wasn’t her name— she looked just about like that— she looked just about like that— an impressionist water-color. Between the one picture and the other there were twelve or fifteen of the bric-à-brac bric-à-brac bric-aà-brac accent added bric-a-brac bric-à-brac things already mentioned, also an oil painting by Elihu Vedder, “The Young Medusa.” mentioned, also an oil painting by Elihu Vedder, “The Young Medusa.” mentioned., also an oil painting by Elihu Vedder, “tThe Young Medusa.” ‘t’ underscored three times by Hobby to capitalize mentioned, also an oil painting by Elihu Vedder, “The Young Medusa.” mentioned; also an oil-painting by Elihu Vedder, “The Young Medusa.” Every now and then the children required me to construct a romance—always impromptu—not a moment’s preparation permitted—and into that romance I had to get get get in get all that bric-à-brac bric-à-brac bric-aà-brac accent added bric-aà-brac accent added bric-à-brac and the three three two three three pictures. I had to start always with the cat and finish with Emmeline. I was never allowed the refreshment of a change, end-for-end end-for-end end for end end-for-end end-for-end . It was not permissible to introduce a bric-à-brac bric-à-brac bric-aà-brac accent added bric-aà-brac accent added bric-à-brac ornament into the story out of its place in the procession. These ¶ These no ¶ These ¶ These ¶ These bric-à-bracs bric-à-bracs “bric-or-bracers” bric-à-bracs bric-aà-bracs accent added bric-à-bracs accent added bric-à-bracs were never allowed a peaceful day, a reposeful day, a restful Sabbath. In their lives there was no Sabbath, In their lives there was no Sabbath, In their lives there was no Sabbath. not in In their lives there was no Sabbath., In their lives there was no Sabbath, in in In Iin ‘I’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ in their lives there was no peace; they peace; they peace. They peace;. Tthey period mended to a semicolon peace; they knew no existence but a monotonous career of violence and bloodshed. In the course of time, the bric-à-brac bric-à-brac bric-aà-brac accent added bric-aà-brac accent added bric-aà-brac and the pictures showed wear. It was because they had had had had had had had had had had so many and such tumultuous tumultuous violent violent tumultuous tumultuous adventures in their romantic careers. As romancer to the children I had a hard time, even from the beginning. If they brought me a picture, in a magazine, picture, in a magazine, picture picture, in a magazine, picture, in a magazine, and required me to build a story to it, they would cover the rest of the page with their pudgy hands to keep me from stealing an idea from it. The stories had to come hot from the bat, always. They had to be absolutely original and fresh. Sometimes the children furnished me simply a character or two, or a dozen, and required me to start out at once on that slim basis and deliver those characters up to a vigorous and entertaining life of crime. If they heard of a new trade, or an unfamiliar animal, or anything like that, I was pretty sure to have to deal with those things in the next romance. Once Clara required me to build a sudden tale out of a plumber and a “bawgunstrictor bawgunstrictor bawgun-strictor bawgunstrictor ,” and I had to do it. She didn’t know what a boa-constrictor was, was, was was, was, until he developed in the tale—then she was better satisfied with it than ever. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. (sub-head.) From Susy’s Biography. (sub-head). From Susy’s Biography. originally ‘From Susy’s Biography.’; underscored From Susy’s Biography. Papa’s Papa’s “Papa’s “Papa’s Papa’s favorite game is billiards, and when he is tired tired tired, tired and wishes to rest himself he stays up all night and plays billiards, it seems to rest his head. He smokes a great deal almost incessantly. He has the mind of an author exactly, some of the simplest things he cant understand. Our burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm is often out of order, and papa had been obliged to take the mahogany-room mahogany-room mahogany-room mahogany-room off from the alarm altogether for a time, because the burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm had been in the habit of ringing even when the mahogany-room mahogany-room mahogany-room mahogany-room window was closed. At length he thought that perhaps the burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm might be in order, and he decided to try and see; accordingly he put it on and then went down and opened the window; consequently the alarm bell rang, it would even if the alarm had been in order. Papa went despairingly upstairs upstairs up-stairs up-stairs upstairs and said to mamma, “Livy “Livy ‘Livy ‘“Livy single quotation mark mended to double “Livy the mahogany-room won’t go on. I have just opened the window to see.” see.” see.’ see.’” single quotation mark mended to double see.” “Why “Why ‘Why ‘“Why single quotation mark mended to double “Why , Youth,” Youth,” Youth,’* ’ ’ footnote inserted and canceled at foot of page: * Pet name for me. M. T. Youth,’ Youth,’” single quotation mark mended to double Youth,” mamma replied “if “if ‘if ‘“if single quotation mark mended to double “if you’ve opened the window, why of coarse the alarm will ring!” ring!” ring!’ ring!’” single quotation mark mended to double ring!” “That’s “That’s ‘That’s ‘“That’s single quotation mark mended to double “That’s what I’ve opened it for, why I just went down to see if it would ring!” ring!” ring!’ ring!’” single quotation mark mended to double ring!” Mamma tried to explain to papa that when he wanted to go and see whether the alarm would ring while the window was closed he mustn’t go and open the window—but in vain, papa couldn’t understand, and got very impatient with mamma for trying to make him believe an impossible thing true. true. true.” true.” true. This is a frank biographer, and an honest one; she uses no sandpaper on me. I have, to this day, the same dull head in the matter of conundrums and perplexities which Susy Susy Susiey Susy had discovered in those long-gone days. Complexities annoy me; they they then theny they irritate me; then this progressive feeling presently warms into anger. I cannot get far in the reading of the commonest and simplest contract—with its “parties of the first part,” and “parties of the second part,” and “parties of the third part,”—before before not in before before my temper is all gone. Ashcroft comes up here every day and pathetically tries to make me understand the points of the lawsuit which we are conducting against Henry Butters Butters Butters Hobby queried this word on TS1, and SLC canceled her query , Harold Wheeler, and the rest of those Plasmon thieves, thieves, thieves, thieves, buccaneers, bucaneers, buccaneers, but daily he has to give it up. It is pitiful to see, when he bends his earnest and appealing eyes upon me and says, after one of his efforts, “Now you do understand that, don’t you?” I am always obliged to say say say say, “I don’t, Ashcroft. I wish I could understand it, but I don’t. Send for the cat.” In the days which Susy Susy Susiey Susy is talking about, a perplexity fell to my lot one day. F. G. Whitmore was my business agent, and he brought me out from town in his buggy. We drove by the porte-cochère porte-cochère porte-cocheère accent added porte-cocheère accent added by SLC; Munro added the underscore porte-cochère and toward the stable. Now this was a single single single ‘single’ underscored single road, and was like a spoon whose handle stretched from the gate to a great round flower-bed in the neighborhood of the stable. At the approach to the flower-bed the road divided and circumnavigated it, making a loop, which I have likened to the bowl of the spoon. spoon. spoon. I was sitting on the starboard side. spoon. I was sitting on the starboard side. spoon. As we neared the loop, loop, loop, I sitting, as I say, on the starboard side (and that was the side on which the house was) loop, I sitting, as I say, on the starboard side (and that was the side on which the house was) loop, I was sitting, as I say, on the starboard side (and that was the side on which the house was) loop, I saw that Whitmore was laying his course to port, (I was sitting on the starboard side—the side the house was on), port, (I was . . . on), port, port, (I was sitting on the starboard side—the side the house was on), SLC canceled ‘starboard’, then restored it with the instruction ‘STET’; Munro wrote ‘starboard’ in the margin for clarification port, (I was sitting on the starboard side—the side of the house was on) ◇, Munro canceled ‘of’; SLC canceled the unidentified mark port, (I was sitting on the starboard side—the side the house was on), and was going to start around that spoon-bowl spoon-bowl spoon-bowl spoon-bowl on that left-hand left-hand left-hand left-hand side. I said, “Don’t said, ¶ “Don’t said no ¶ “Don’t said, ¶ “Don’t said, ¶ “Don’t do that, Whitmore; take the right-hand side. Then I shall be next to the house when we get to the door.” He said, said, said said, said, “That That That That ‘That’ underscored That will not will not will will not will not happen in any any any any ‘any’ underscored any case, it case, it case. It case., Iit ‘I’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ case, it doesn’t make any difference which way way way wasy I go around this flower-bed.” I explained to him that he was an ass, but he stuck to his proposition, and I said, “Go said, ¶ “Go said no ¶ “Go said, ¶ “Go said, ¶ “Go on and try it, and see.” He went on and tried it, and sure enough he fetched me up at the door on the very side very side side very side very side that he had said had said said had said had said I would be. I was not able to believe it then, and I don’t believe it yet. I said, yet. ¶ I said, yet. no ¶ I said yet. ¶ I said, yet. ¶ I said, “Whitmore, that is merely an accident. accident. accident. accident. You can’t do it again.” He again.” ¶ He again.” no ¶ He again.” no ¶ He again.” ¶ He said he could—and he he we we he he drove down into the street, fetched around, came back, and actually back, and actually back— back—, and actually back, and actually did it again. I was stupefied, paralysed paralysed paralyzed , petrified, with these strange results, but they did not convince me. I didn’t believe he could do it another time, another time, again, another time, another time, but he did. He said he could do it all day, and fetch up the same way every time. By time. By time—and by time.— and bBy time. By that time my temper was gone, and I asked him to go home and apply to the asylum asylum Asylum and I would pay the expenses; expenses; expenses. expenses.; period mended to a semicolon expenses; I didn’t want to see him any more for a week. I week. ¶ I week. no ¶ I week. ¶ I went up stairs up stairs upstairs up-stairs in a rage and started to tell Livy Livy Livy Leivy about it, expecting to get her sympathy for me and to breed aversion in her for Whitmore; but she merely burst into peal after peal of laughter, as the the my the the tale of my adventure went on, for her head was like Susy’s: riddles Susy’s: riddles Susiey’s. Riddles Susy’s. Riddles Susy’s:. Rriddles period mended to a colon; ‘R’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ Susy’s: riddles and complexities had no terrors for it. Her mind and Susy’s Susy’s Susiey’s Susy’s were analytical; analytical; analytical. analytical.; period mended to a semicolon analytical; I have tried to make it appear that mine was different. Many and many a time I have told that buggy experiment, hoping against hope that I would some time or other find somebody who would be on my side, side, side— side—, side, but it has never happened. And I am never able to go glibly forward and state the circumstances of that buggy’s progress without having to halt and consider consider consider consider , and call up in my mind the spoon-handle spoon-handle spoon handle spoon-handle spoon-handle , the bowl of the spoon, the buggy and the horse, and my position in the buggy: buggy: buggy— buggy—: buggy: and the minute I have got that far and try to turn it to the left it goes to ruin; ruin; ruin. ruin.; period mended to a semicolon ruin; I can’t see how it is ever going to fetch me out right when we get to the door. Susy Susy Susiey Susy is right in her estimate. I can’t understand things. That burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm which Susy Susy Susiey Susy mentions led a gay and careless life, and had no principles. It was generally out of order at one point or another; another; another, another,; comma mended to a semicolon another; and there was plenty of opportunity, because all the windows and doors in the house, from the cellar up to the top floor top floor top-floor top floor , were connected with it. However, in However, in In However, Iin insertion by SLC; ‘I’ marked for lowercase by Munro However, in its seasons of being out of order it could trouble us for only a very little while: we while: we while. We while.: Wwe period mended to a colon; ‘W’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ while: we quickly found out that it was fooling us, us, us us, us, and that it was buzzing its blood-curdling blood-curdling blood-curdling blood-curdling alarm merely for its own amusement. Then we would shut it off, and and and and send to New York for the electrician—there not being one in all Hartford in those days. When When Then when Then wWhen When the repairs were finished we would set the alarm again and re-establish our confidence in it. It never did any real business except upon one single occasion. All the rest of its expensive career was frivolous and without purpose. Just that one time it performed its duty, and its whole duty—gravely, seriously, admirably. It let fly about two o’clock one black and dreary March March March February ‘March’ deleted, then restored with the instruction ‘stet’ March morning, and I turned out promptly, because I knew that it was not fooling, this time. The bath-room door was on my side of the bed. I stepped in there, turned up the gas, looked at the annunciator annunciator eannunciator annunciator , and and not in and and turned off the alarm—so far as the door indicated was concerned—thus stopping the racket. Then I came back to bed. Mrs. Clemens opened the debate: bed. Mrs. Clemens opened the debate: bed. bed. Mrs. Clemens opened the debate: bed. Mrs. Clemens opened the debate: “What “What Mrs. Clemens said “What Mrs. Clemens said, “What “What was it?” “It “It I said “It I said “It “It was the cellar door.” “Was “Was She said “Was She said “Was “Was it a burglar, do you think?” “Yes,” I said, “of of Of of course it was. Did Did Do Do Did Did you suppose it was a Sunday-school superintendent?” “No. What “No. What She said “What She said “No. “What “No. What do you suppose he wants?” “I “I I said “I I said “I “I suppose he wants jewelry, but he is not acquainted with the house and he thinks it is in the cellar. I don’t like to disappoint a burglar whom I am not acquainted with, and who has done me no harm, but if he had had common sagacity enough to inquire, I could have told him we kept nothing down there but coal and vegetables. Still it may be that he is acquainted with this this this the place, and that what he really wants is coal and vegetables. On the whole, I think it is vegetables he is after.” after.” after.” after.” “Are “Are She said “Are She said “Are “Are you going down to see?” “No; I “No; I “No,” I said “I “No,;” I said “I comma mended to a semicolon “No; I could not be of any assistance. Let him select for himself; I don’t know where the things are.” himself; I don’t know where the things are.” himself.” himself.”; I don’t know where the things are.” period mended to a semicolon himself; I don’t know where the things are.” Then she said, said, said said, said, “But suppose he comes up to the ground floor!” “That’s “That’s I said “That’s I said “That’s “That’s all right. We shall know it the minute he opens a door on that floor. It will set off the alarm.” Just then the terrific buzzing broke out again. I said, “He said, ¶ “He said no ¶ “He said, ¶ “He said, ¶ “He has arrived. I told told told told typed underscore of ‘told’ canceled told you he would. I know all about burglars and their ways. They are systematic people.” people.” people.” people.” people.” I went into the bath-room to see if I was right, and I was. I shut off the dining room dining room dining-room and stopped the buzzing, buzzing, buzzing buzzing, buzzing, and came back to bed. My wife said, said, said said, said, “What do you suppose he is after now?” I said, said, said said, said, “I think he has got all the vegetables he wants wants wanteds wants and is coming up for napkin-rings and odds and ends for the wife and children children the children the children children . They all have families—burglars have—and they are always thoughtful of them, always take a few necessaries of life for themselves, and fill out with fill out with the rest is the rest is fill out with fill out with tokens of remembrance for the family. In taking them they do not forget us: those us: those us. Those us: . Tthose period mended to a colon us: those very things represent tokens of his remembrance of us, and also of our remembrance of him. us, and also of our remembrance of him. us also. us, also. and also of our remembrance of him. us, and also of our remembrance of him. We never get them again; the again; the again. The again; . Tthe period mended to a semicolon again; the memory of the attention remains embalmed in our hearts.” “Are “Are She said “Are She said “Are “Are you going down to see what it is he wants now?” “No,” I said, “I “I I “I am no more interested than I was before. They They These Thesey They are experienced people,—burglars; they people,—burglars; they people. They people.,—burglars; Tthey people,—burglars; they know what they want; want; want. want.; period mended to a semicolon want; I should be no help to him. I think he is is is is is after ceramics and bric-à-brac bric-à-brac bric-aà-brac accent added bric-aà-brac accent added bric-à-brac and such things. If he knows the house he knows that that is all that he can find on the dining room dining room dining-room floor.” She said, with a strong interest perceptible in her tone, said, . . . tone, said said, with a strong interest perceptible in her tone, said, with a strong interest perceptible in her tone, “Suppose he comes up here!” I said, said, said said, said, “It is all right. He will give us notice.” “What “What She said “What She said “What “What shall we do then?” “Climb “Climb I said “Climb I said “Climb “Climb out of the window.” She said, a little restively, “Well, said, a little restively, “Well, said “Well said, a little restively, “Well, said, a little restively, “Well, what is the use of a burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm for us?” “You “You I said “You I said “You “You have seen, dear heart, seen, dear heart, seen seen, dear heart, seen, dear heart, that it has been useful up to the present moment, and I have explained to you how it will be continuously useful after he gets up here.” That was the end of it. He didn’t ring any more alarms. Presently alarms. no ¶ Presently alarms. ¶ Presently alarms. no ¶ Presently I said, “He said, ¶ “He said no ¶ “He said, ¶ “He said, ¶ “He is disappointed, I think. He has gone off with the vegetables and the bric-à-brac, bric-à-brac, bric-aà-brac accent added bric-aà-brac, accent added bric-à-brac, and I think he is dissatisfied.” We went to sleep, and at a quarter before eight in the morning I was out, and hurrying, for I was to take the 8.29 8.29 8-29 8:29 8-.29 8.29 train for New York. I found the gas burning brightly—full head—all over the first floor. My new overcoat was gone; my old umbrella was gone; my new patent-leather shoes, which I had never worn, were gone. The large window which opened into the ombra ombra ombra ombra at the rear of the house was standing wide. I passed out through it and tracked the burglar down the hill through the trees; tracked him without difficulty, because he had blazed his progress with imitation silver napkin-rings, napkin-rings, napkin-rings napkin-rings, napkin-rings, and my umbrella, and various other things which he had disapproved of; and I went back in triumph and proved to my wife that he was a disappointed burglar. I had suspected he would be, from the start, and from his not coming up to our floor to get human beings. Things happened to me that day in New York. I will tell about them another time. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. ‘From Susy’s Biography.’ underscored From Susy’s Biography. Papa Papa “Papa “Papa Papa has a peculiar gait we like, it seems just to sute him, but most people do not; he always walks up and down the room while thinking and between each coarse at meals. meals. meals.” meals.” meals. A lady distantly related to us came to visit us once in those days. She came to stay a week, but all our efforts to make her happy failed, we we and we and we we could not imagine why, and she got up her anchor and sailed the next morning. why, and . . . morning. why. why., and she got up her anchor and sailed the next morning. why, and . . . morning. We did much guessing, but could not solve the mystery. Later we found out what the trouble was. It was my tramping up and down between the courses. She conceived the idea that I could not stand her society. That word “Youth,” as the reader has perhaps already guessed, was my wife’s pet name for me. It was gently satirical, but also affectionate. I had certain mental and material peculiarities and customs proper to a much younger person than I was. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. ‘From Susy’s Biography.’ underscored From Susy’s Biography. Papa Papa “Papa “Papa Papa is very fond of animals particularly of cats, we had a dear little gray kitten once that he named “Lazy” “Lazy” ‘Lazy’ ‘“Lazy’” single quotation marks mended to double “Lazy” (papa always wears gray to match his hair and eyes) and he would carry him around on his shoulder, it was a mighty pretty sight! the gray cat sound asleep against papa’s gray coat and hair. The names that he has given our different cats, are realy remarkably funny, they are namely Stray Kit, Abner, Motley, Fraeulein Fraeulein Fraeulein Fraeulein ink cancellation mark smeared to cancel the revision , Lazy, Bufalo Bill, Soapy Sall, Soapy Sall, Soapy Sall, Soapy Sall, not in Cleveland, Sour Mash, and Pestilence and Famine. Famine. Famine.” Famine.” Famine. At one time when the children were small, we had a very black mother-cat mother-cat mother-cat mother-cat named Satan, and Satan had a small black offspring named Sin. Pronouns were a difficulty for the children. Little Clara came in one day, her black eyes snapping with indignation, and said, “Papa said, ¶ “Papa said no ¶ “Papa said, ¶ “Papa said, ¶ “Papa , Satan ought to be punished. She is out there at the greenhouse and there she stays and stays, and his kitten is down stairs down stairs down-stairs down-stairs crying.” crying.” crying.” crying.” From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. ‘From Susy’s Biography.’ underscored From Susy’s Biography. Papa Papa “Papa “Papa Papa uses very strong language, but I have an idea not nearly so strong as when he first maried mamma. A lady acquaintance of his is rather apt to interupt what one is saying, and papa told mamma that he thought he should say to the lady’s husband “I “I ‘I ‘“I single quotation mark mended to double “I am glad Susy Warner Susy Warner Susiey Warner circled in blue pencil to indicate a temporary suppression Susy Warner Susy Warner Tabitha Wilson your wife your wife wasn’t present when the Deity said ‘Let ‘Let Let ‘Let there be light.’ ” light.’ ” light’ ” light.’ ” It is as I have said before. This is a frank historian. She doesn’t cover up one’s deficiencies, but gives them an equal showing with one’s handsomer qualities. Of course I made the remark which she has quoted—and even at this distant day I am still as much as half persuaded that if Susy Warner Susy Warner Susiey Warner circled in blue pencil to indicate a temporary suppression Susy Warner Susy Warner that lady that lady had been present when the Creator said “Let there be light” she would have interrupted Him and we shouldn’t ever have got it. Him and we shouldn’t ever have got it. him. and we shouldn’t ever have got it. him and we shouldn’t ever have got it. Him and we shouldn’t ever have got it. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. ‘From Susy’s Biography.’ underscored From Susy’s Biography. Papa Papa “Papapa “Papapa Papapa this word was queried by the NAR proofreader, probably Munro; SLC canceled the redundant syllable and the query Papa said the other day, “I “I ‘I ‘“I single quotation mark mended to double “I am a mugwump and a mugwump is pure from the marrow out.” out.” out.’ out.‘” single quotation mark mended to double; double quotation mark canceled in pencil by an unknown hand out.” a double quotation mark was inserted and queried by the NAR proofreader, probably by Munro; SLC did not respond out. (Papa knows that I am writing this biography of him, and he said this for it.) He doesn’t like to go to church at all, why I never understood, until just now, he told us the other day that he couldn’t bear to hear any one talk but himself, but that he could listen to himself talk for hours without getting tired, of course he said this in joke, but I’ve no dought dought dought doubt it was founded on truth. truth. truth.” truth.” truth.