6 January 1907 Hamilton, Bermuda, January 6, 1907 Hamilton, Bermuda, January 6, 1907 Dictated at Hamilton, Bermuda. Jan. 6, 1907. [ Dictated at Hamilton, Bermuda., Jan.uary6, 1907.] SLC inserted ‘Dictated at’; Munro made the other revisions, underscored ‘Dictated . . . 1907.’, inserted the brackets, and marked the dateline to precede ‘ “That reminds me.” ’ at 359.15 [Dictated at Hamilton, Bermuda, January 6, 1907.] The power of association to bring back a lost word or name, as shown on the Bermuda trip when Mr. Clemens and Mr. Twichell recall Miss Kirkham’s name—Mr. Clemens’s dream, born of the association of Mr. Twichell’s remarks about aerial navigation and the reading of the statistics of the railway accidents compiled by the United States United States U.S. Government. “That reminds me.” In conversation we are always using that phrase, and seldom or never noticing how large a significance it bears. It stands for a curious and interesting fact, to wit: that sleeping or waking, dreaming or talking, the thoughts which swarm through our heads are almost constantly, almost continuously, accompanied by a like swarm of reminders of incidents and episodes of our past. A man A man One A man A man can never know what what to what what a large traffic large traffic great degree large traffic large traffic this commerce of association carries on carries on occupies carries on carries on in his mind his mind our his minds our minds until he sets out to write his autobiography; he then finds that a thought is seldom born to him that does not immediately remind him of some event, large or small, in his past experience. Quite naturally these present remarks present remarks present remarks remarks remind me of various things, among others this: that sometimes a thought, by the power of association, will bring back to your mind a lost word or a lost name which you have not been able to recover by any other process known to your mental equipment. Yesterday we had an instance of this. Reverend [¶] Reverend [¶] Rev. no ¶ Rev. Joseph H. Twichell Joseph H. Twichell Joseph H. Twichell J.H.T. proposed alternate reading interlined Joseph H. Twichell is with me on this flying trip to Bermuda. He was with me on my last visit to Bermuda, and to-day we were trying to remember when it was; we was; we was; we was; w.We was. We thought it was somewhere in the neighborhood of thirty years ago, but that was as near as we could get at the date. Twichell Twichell Twichell T. proposed alternate reading interlined Twichell said that the landlady in whose boarding-house we sojourned in that ancient time could doubtless furnish us the the that the thate the date, and we must look her up. We wanted to see her, anyway, because she and her blooming daughter of eighteen were the only persons whose acquaintance we had made at that time, for we were traveling traveling traveling travelling under fictitious names, and people who wear aliases are not given to seeking society and bringing themselves under suspicion. But at this point in our talk we encountered an obstruction: obstruction: obstruction; obstruction;: semicolon mended to a colon obstruction: we could not recall the landlady’s name. We hunted all around all around not in all around all around through our minds for that name, using all the customary methods of research, but without success; the name was gone from us, apparently permanently. We finally gave the matter up, and fell to talking about something else. The talk wandered from one subject to another, and finally arrived at Twichell’s Twichell’s Twichell’s T.’s proposed alternate reading interlined Twichell’s school days school days school days school-days in Hartford—the Hartford of something more than half a century ago—and he mentioned several of his schoolmasters, dwelling with special interest upon the peculiarities of an aged one named Olney. He remarked that Olney, humble village schoolmaster as he was, was yet a man of superior parts, and had published text-books which had enjoyed a wide currency in America in their day. I said I remembered those books, and had studied “Olney’s Geography” “Olney’s Geography” Olney’s Geography in school when I was a boy. Then Twichell Twichell Twichell T. proposed alternate reading interlined Twichell said, “That reminds me—our landlady’s name was a name that was associated with school-books of some kind or other other other, other, other fifty or sixty years ago. I wonder what it was. I believe it began with K.” Association did the rest, and did it instantly. I said, said, said said, said, “Kirkham’s Grammar! Grammar! Grammar.! period mended to an exclamation point Grammar! ” That settled it. Kirkham was the name; and we went out to seek for the owner of it. There was no trouble about that, for Bermuda is not large, and is like the earlier Garden of Eden, in that everybody in it knows everybody else, just as it was in the serpent’s headquarters headquarters head-quarters headquarters in Adam’s time. We easily found Miss Kirkham—she that had been the blooming girl of a generation before—and she was still keeping boarders; but her mother had passed from this life. She settled the date for us, and did it with certainty, by help of a couple of uncommon circumstances, events of that ancient time. She said we had sailed from Bermuda on the 24th of May May May May, May, 1877, 1877, 1877, (Queen Victoria’s birthday birth-annivesary), 1877, which was the day on which her only nephew was born—and he is now thirty years of age. The other unusual circumstance—she called it an unusual circumstance, and I didn’t say anything—was that on that day the Rev. Mr. Twichell Twichell Twichell T. proposed alternate reading interlined Twichell (bearing the assumed name of Peters) had made a statement to her which she regarded as a fiction. I remembered the circumstance very well. We had bidden the young girl good-bye good-bye good-bye good-by and had gone fifty yards, perhaps, when Twichell said he had forgotten something (I doubted it,) (I doubted it,) (I doubted it,) (I doubted it) and must go back. When he rejoined me he was silent, and this alarmed me, because I had not seen an example of it before. He seemed quite uncomfortable, and I asked him what the trouble was. He said he had been inspired to give the girl a pleasant surprise, and so had gone back and said to her— her— the girl her— her— “That young fellow’s name is not Wilkinson—that’s Mark Twain.” She did not lose her mind; she did not exhibit any excitement at all, but said quite simply, quite tranquilly, “Tell it to the marines, Mr. Peters—if that should happen to be your your your ‘your’ underscored your name.” It was very pleasant to meet her again. We were white-headed, but she was not; in the sweet and unvexed spiritual atmosphere of the Bermudas one does not achieve gray hairs at forty-eight. I had a dream last night, and of course it was born of association, like nearly everything else that drifts into a person’s head, asleep or awake. On board ship, ship, ship ship, ship, on the passage down, down, down, down, Twichell Twichell Twichell T. proposed alternate reading interlined Twichell was talking about the swiftly swiftly fast swiftly swiftly developing possibilities of aerial aerial aerial aeërial dieresis added navigation, and he quoted those striking verses of Tennyson’s which forecast a future when air-borne vessels of war shall meet and fight above above among above above the clouds and redden the earth below with a rain of blood. This picture of carnage and blood and death reminded me of something which I had read a fortnight a fortnight fourteen months a fortnight ago— fourteen months a fortnight a fortnight ago—statistics of railway accidents compiled by the United States Government, wherein the appalling fact was set forth that on our 200,000 200,000 220,000 2200,000 200,000 miles of railway we annually kill 10,000 10,000 1200 10,000 1200 10,000 10,000 corrected miswriting 10,000 persons outright outright outright every year outright and injure 80,000 80,000 60,000 680,000 80,000 . The war-ships in the air suggested the railway horrors, and three nights afterward the railway horrors suggested my dream. The work of association was going on in my head, unconsciously, all that time. It was an admirable dream, what there was of it. In [¶] In ¶ In [¶] In it I saw a funeral procession; I saw it from a mountain peak; I saw it crawling along and curving here and there, serpent-like serpent-like serpent-like serpentlike , through a level vast plain. I seemed to see a hundred miles of the procession, but neither the beginning of it nor the end of it was within the limits of my vision. The procession was in ten divisions, each division marked by a sombre sombre somber somberre sombre flag, and the whole represented ten years of our railway activities activities activities activities SLC retraced ‘t’ both times to correct a mistyping that Hobby had corrected on TS1 ribbon in the accident line; each division was composed of 80,000 80,000 60,000 680,000 80,000 cripples, and was was each division was each division was was bearing its own year’s 10,000 10,000 1200 10,000 10,000 mutilated corpses to the grave: in the aggregate 800,000 800,000 600,000 6800,000 800,000 cripples and 100,000 100,000 12,000 100,000 100,000 dead, dead, dead, dead, drenched in blood! blood! blood. blood.! period mended to an exclamation point blood!