5 September 1906 Wednesday, September 5, 1906 Wednesday, September 5, 1906 Wednesday, Sept. 5, 1906. Wednesday Dictated, Sept. 5, 1906. dateline marked to precede ‘It is’ at 222.28 [Dictated September 5, 1906.] placed before ‘It is’ at 222.28 Items from the the “The Children’s Record, Record, Book Record,” showing their different characteristics. It is years since I have examined the the “The Children’s Record. Record. Book Record.” Book.” Record.” Record.” I have turned over a few of its pages this morning. This book is a record in which Mrs. Clemens and I registered some of the sayings and doings of the children, in the long ago, when they were little chaps. Of course course course course, course, we wrote these things down at the time because they were of momentary interest—things of the passing hour, and of no permanent value—but at this distant day I find that they still possess an interest for me and also a value, because it turns out that they were registrations of character registrations of character registrations of character registrations of character ‘registrations of character’ underscored registrations of character . The qualities then revealed by fitful glimpses, in childish acts and speeches, remained as a permanency in the children’s characters permanency in the children’s characters in the drift of the years, permanency, in the children’s characters in the drift of the years, permanency in the children’s characters in the drift of the years, in the drift of the years, and were always afterward clearly and definitely recognizable. There is a masterful streak in Jean that now and then moves her to set my authority aside for a moment and end a losing argument in that prompt and effective fashion. And here in this old book I find evidence that she was just like that before she was quite four years old. From the Children’s Record. Quarry Farm,July 7, 1884. From the Children’s Record. Quarry Farm, July 7, 1884. From The Children’s Book Record. Quarry Farm., July 7, 1884. From The Chidren’s Book Record. Quarry Farm. July 7, 1884. revised by Lyon; dateline marked to precede ‘Yesterday’ at 223.7 by SLC; ‘From The Children’s Record.’ underscored by Munro From The Children’s Record. Quarry Farm, July 7, 1884.— placed to precede ‘Yesterday’ at 223.7 Yesterday evening our cows (after being inspected and worshiped worshiped worshiped worshipped worshipped by Jean from the shed roof roof roof not in for an hour,) wandered off down into the pasture, and left her bereft. I thought I was going to get back home, now, but that was an error. Jean knew of some more cows, in a field somewhere, and took my hand and led me thitherward. When we turned the corner and took the right-hand road, I saw that we should presently be out of range of call and sight; so I began to argue against continuing the expedition, and Jean began to argue in favor of it—she using English for light skirmishing, and German for “business.” I kept up my end with vigor, and demolished her arguments in detail, one after the other, till I judged I had her about cornered. She hesitated a moment, then answered up sharply: “Wir werden nichts mehr darüber sprechen!” “Wir werden nichts mehr darüber sprechen!” “Wir werden kein nichtsmehr daruüber sprechen!” umlaut added “Wir werden kein nichts mehr daruüber sprechen!” revision by Lyon, umlaut added; ‘ “Wir . . . sprechen!” ’ underscored by Munro “Wir werden nichts mehr darüber sprechen!” (We won’t talk any more about it! it! it. it.! period mended to an exclamation point it! ) It nearly took my breath away; though I thought I might possibly have misunderstood. I said: “Why, you little rascal! Was hast du gesagt? Was hast du gesagt? Was hast du gesagt? Was hast du gesagt? ‘Was hast du gesagt?’ underscored Was hast du gesagt? ” But she said the same words over again, and in the same decided way. I suppose I ought to have been outraged; but I wasn’t, I was charmed. And I suppose I ought to have spanked her; but I didn’t, I fraternized with the enemy, and we went on and spent half an hour with the cows. That incident is followed in the Record Record “Record” by the following paragraph, which is another instance of a juvenile characteristic maintaining itself into mature age. Susy was persistently and conscientiously truthful throughout her life, life, life, life with the exception of one one a a one one interruption covering several months, and perhaps a year. This was while she was still a little child. Suddenly—not gradually—she began to lie; not furtively, but frankly, openly, and on a scale quite disproportioned to her size. Her mother was so stunned, so nearly paralysed paralysed paralyzed for a day or two, that she did not know what to do with the emergency. Reasonings, persuasions, beseechings, all went for nothing; they produced no effect; the lying went tranquilly on. Other remedies were tried, but they failed. There is a tradition that success was finally accomplished by whipping. I think the Record Record “Record” “Record” Record says so, but if it does it is because the Record Record record rRecord Record is incomplete. Whipping was indeed indeed indeed indeed tried, and was faithfully kept up during two or three weeks, but the results were merely temporary; the temporary; the temporary;. Tthe period mended to a semicolon temporary; the reforms achieved were discouragingly brief. Fortunately for Susy, an incident presently occurred which put a complete stop to all the mother’s efforts in the direction of reform. This incident was the chance discovery in Darwin of a passage which said that when a child exhibits a sudden and unaccountable disposition to forsake the truth and restrict itself to lying, the explanation must be sought away back in the past; that an ancestor of the child had had the same disease, at the same tender age; that it was irremovable by persuasion or punishment, and that it had ceased as suddenly and as mysteriously as it had come, when it had run its appointed course. I think Mr. Darwin said that nothing was necessary but to leave the matter alone and let the malady have its way and perish by the statute of limitations. We had confidence in Darwin, Darwin, Darwin, Darwin, and after that day day day day Susy was relieved of our reformatory persecutions. She went on lying without let or hindrance during several months, or a year; then the lying suddenly ceased, and she became as conscientiously and exactingly truthful as she had been before the attack, and she remained so to the end of her life. end of her life. end. end. of her life. end of her life. The paragraph in the Record Record “Record,” “Record,” Record to which I have been leading up is in my handwriting, and is in my handwriting, and not in is in my handwriting, and is in my handwriting, and is of a date so long posterior to the time of the lying-malady lying-malady lying-malady lying malady that she had evidently forgotten that truth-speaking truth-speaking truth-speaking truth-speaking had ever had any difficulties for her. Mama was speaking of a servant who had been pretty unveracious, but was now “trying to tell the truth.” Susy was a good deal surprised, and said she shouldn’t think anybody would have to try to tell the truth. In the Record Record “Record” “Record” Record the children’s acts and speeches quite definitely define their characters. Susy’s indicated the presence of mentality—thought—and they were generally marked by gravity. She was timid, on her physical side, but had an abundance of moral courage. Clara was sturdy, independent, orderly, practical, persistent, plucky—just a little animal, and very satisfactory. Charles Dudley Warner said Susy was made of mind, and Clara of matter. When Motley, the kitten, died, some one said that the thoughts of the two children need not be inquired into, they could be divined: divined: divined— divined—: divined: that Susy was wondering if this was the end end end ‘end’ underscored end of Motley, and had his life been worth while; whereas Clara was merely merely merely merely interested in seeing to it that there should be a creditable funeral. In those days Susy was a dreamer, a thinker, a poet and philosopher, and Clara—— Clara—— Clara—— Clara— well, Clara wasn’t. In after years a passion for music developed the latent spirituality and intellectuality and intellectuality not in and intellectuality and intellectuality in Clara, and her practicality took second and, in fact, even third place, with the result that nowadays she loses purses and fans, and neglects things, and forgets orders, with a poet’s facility. place, with the . . . poet’s facility. place, with the . . . poet’s facility. place, with the . . . poet’s facility. place. Jean was from the beginning orderly, steady, diligent, persistent; and remains so. She picked up languages easily, and kept them. After ten years of unremitting labor under the best masters, domestic and foreign, Clara will make her public début as a singer on the concert stage seventeen days hence. After ten . . . masters, domestic and foreign, . . . days hence. After ten . . . masters, . . . days hence. After ten . . . masters, domestic and foreign, . . . days hence. revised, then deleted, then marked for restoration with the instruction ‘STET’, and then deleted again not in Susy [¶] Susy From the Children’s Record. [¶] Susy From the Children’s Record. [¶] Susy [¶] Susy aged eleven, Jean three. three. three. three.— Susy said the other day when she saw Jean bringing a cat to me of her own motion, “Jean has found out already that mamma loves morals and papa loves cats.” It is another of Susy’s remorselessly sound verdicts. [¶] It is another of Susy’s remorselessly sound verdicts. not in ¶ It is another of Susy’s remorselessly sound verdicts. [¶] It is another of Susy’s remorselessly sound verdicts. As a child, Jean neglected my books. When she was nine years old Will Gillette invited her and the rest of us to a dinner at the Murray Hill Hotel in New York, in order that we might get acquainted with Mrs. Leslie and her daughters. Elsie Leslie was nine years old, and was a great celebrity on the stage. Jean was astonished and awed to see that little slip of a thing sit up at table and take part in the conversation of the grown people, capably and with ease and tranquillity tranquillity tranquility tranquillity tranquillity . Poor Jean was obliged to keep still, for the subjects discussed never happened to hit her level; level; level,; comma mended to a semicolon level, but at last the talk fell within her limit and she had her chance to contribute to it. “Tom Sawyer” was mentioned. Jean spoke gratefully up and said, “I know who wrote that book— book— book,— book— Harriet Beecher Stowe! Stowe! Stowe. Stowe.! period mended to an exclamation point Stowe! ” One [¶] One From the Children’s Record. [¶] One From the Children’s Record. [¶] One [¶] One evening Susy had prayed, Clara was curled up for sleep; she was reminded that it was her turn to pray now. She said “Oh Oh Oh Oh! Oh! one’s enough,” and dropped off to slumber. Clara five years old. old. old. old.— We were in Germany. The nurse, Rosa, was not allowed to speak to the children otherwise than in German. Clara grew very tired of it; by and by the little creature’s patience was exhausted, and she said “Aunt Clara, Clara, Clara Clara, Clara, I wish wish wish ‘wish’ underscored wish God had made Rosa in English.” November 30, 1878. November 30, 1878. November 30, 1878. November 30, 1878. not in Clara four years old, Susy six. six. six. six.— This morning when Clara discovered that this is my birthday, she was greatly troubled because she had provided no gift for me, and repeated her sorrow several times. Finally she went musing to the nursery and presently returned with her newest and dearest treasure, a large toy horse, and said said said said, said, “You shall have this horse for your birthday, papa.” I accepted it with many thanks. After an hour she was racing up and down the room with the horse, when Susy said, “Why Clara, you gave that horse to papa, and now you’ve tooken it again.” Clara. Clara. Clara. Clara.— “I “I I “I “I never give it to him for always always always ‘always’ underscored always ; I give it to him for his birthday birthday birthday ‘birthday’ underscored birthday .” In Geneva, in September, I lay abed late one morning, morning, morning, morning, and as Clara was passing through the room I took her on my bed a moment. Then the child went to Clara Spaulding and said, “Aunt Clara, papa is a good deal of trouble to me.” “Is he? Why?” “Well, he wants me to get in bed with him, and I can’t do that with jelmuls jelmuls gelmuls gjelmuls jelmuls (gentlemen) (gentlemen) (gentlemen) [gentlemen] —I don’t like jelmuls jelmuls gelmuls gjelmuls jelmuls anyway.” “What, you don’t like gentlemen! Don’t you like Uncle Theodore Crane?” “Oh yes, but he’s not a jelmul jelmul gelmul gjelmul jelmul , he’s a friend.”