2 October 1906 Tuesday, October 2, 1906 Another stolen holiday, including banquet-speech banquet-speech banquet speech in New York and visit to Norfolk, Connecticut Connecticut Conn. —In a letter received received recd. this morning friend calls Mr. Clemens “the blessedest ‘accident’ I have yet met with with not in in my life”—Mr. Clemens reviews the series of “accidents” during his life which have led up to meeting this friend. I have been to New York and to Fairhaven Fairhaven Fairhaven Fairhaven away inserted without a caret and then deleted again on another stolen holiday—sixteen or seventeen days, days, days, days this time. My summer seems to have been passed mainly in stolen holidays; pretext-holidays. With the exception of a banquet-speech banquet-speech banquet-speech banquet speech in New York on the 19th of September, and a visit to Norfolk, Connecticut, to witness my daughter Clara’s début début debut as a singer, I believe these many weeks of holidays were secured to me by pretext alone. The pretexts were pretty thin, as a rule—however, however, however, however I have no regrets. In all my seventy years I have not often had a holiday when I really wanted one. The morning mail brings me a letter from a young woman in New York, in which I find the remark, remark, remark, remark “You are the blessedest ‘accident’ I have yet met with with with in my life.” This brings back to my mind a conversation which I had with her a week ago, and I wish to recall some of the details of it, because they illustrate a philosophy of mine—or a superstition of mine, if you prefer that word. I had been able to do for her what she regarded as a great service, and, frankly speaking, I realized that it was, although it was a service which had cost me so little in the way of effort that the time and labor involved did not entitle it to a compliment. She said: “You have accomplished this for me, and I am not acquainted with another person who could have done it. It was a happy accident that I accidentally met you last April—no, not an accident, there being no such things as accidents—it was ordered.” “Ordered by whom? Or by what?” “By the Power Power pPower that watches over us and commands all events.” “Issuing the orders from day to day?” “Perhaps so. Yes, I suppose that is the way.” I said “I believe that only one command has ever been issued, and that that command was issued in the beginning of time—in the first second of time; Anno Mundi 1 Anno Mundi 1 Anno Mundi 1 inserted in the margin that that command resulted in an act; in Adam’s first act—if there was an Adam—and that from that act sprang sprang spruang another act as a natural and unavoidable consequence—let us say it was Eve’s act—and that from that that that ‘that’ underscored act proceeded another another another ‘another’ underscored act of one of these two persons as an unavoidable consequence; and that now the chain of natural and unavoidable happenings being started, there has never been a break in it from that day to this; and so, in my belief, Adam’s first act was the origin and cause of the service which I have been enabled to do for you, and I am quite sure that if Adam’s first act, howsoever trifling it may have been, had taken a different form, no matter how trifling a form, the entire chain of human events for all these thousands of years would have been changed; changed; changed,; comma mended to a semicolon changed, in which case it is most unlikely that you and I would ever have met. Indeed it is most unlikely that both both both ‘both’ underscored of us would have been born in the same land. The very slightest change in Adam’s first act could have resulted in your being an Eskimo and I a Hottentot; and could also have resulted in your being born five centuries ago and in my birth being postponed until century after next. next. next.” “I “I I am not jesting. I have studied these things a long time and I positively believe that the first circumstance that ever happened in this world was the parent of every circumstance that has happened in this world since; that God ordered that first circumstance and has never ordered another one from that day to this. Plainly, then, I am not able to conceive of such a thing as the thing which we call an accident accident accident ‘accident’ underscored —that is to say, an event without a cause. Each event has its own place in the eternal chain of circumstances, and whether it be big or little it will infallibly cause the next next next ‘next’ underscored event, whether the next event be the breaking of a child’s toy or the destruction of a throne. According to this superstition of mine, superstition of mine, superstition, of mine, the breaking of the toy is fully as important an event as the destruction of the throne, since without the breaking of the toy the destruction of the throne would not have happened. “But “But But I like that word accident, although it is, in my belief, absolutely destitute of meaning. I like it because it is short and handy, and because it answers so well and so conveniently, and so briefly, in designating happenings which we should otherwise have to describe as odd, curious, interesting, and so on, and then add some elaboration to help out our meaning. And so for convenience sake, let us say it was an accident that you and I met last April, and that out of that accident grew, in a quite natural way, the linked series of accidents which led up to and made possible the service which I have had the good fortune to render you. Accident is a word which I constantly make use of when I am talking to myself about the chain of incidents which has constituted my life. “I “I I will undertake to go back, now, back, now, back, now, back now and give name and date to some of these accidents. 1841 1841 1841 inserted in the margin When I was six years old, and my brother Henry four, he had the erysipelas, and when he was getting well of it Nature provided him with a new skin. I liked the old one and I wished I could have it. I was prodigiously interested in the peeling process. The skin of one of his heels came off, and was tough and stiff and resembled a cup, and it hung by only a shred of skin. I wanted it to play with, but, young as I was, I had a good deal of judgment and I knew that I couldn’t get it by asking for it—therefore I must think up some more judicious way. When at last I was alone with him for a moment, there was my chance. The time was brief; there was no scissors handy, and I pulled that heel-cup loose by force. Henry was hurt by this operation and he cried—cried much louder than was necessary, as it seemed to me, considering how small was his loss and how great my gain; but I was mainly troubled because it attracted attention, and brought rebuke for me and punishment. “If “If If I had the kind of memory I would like to have, have, have, have I could recall what the punishment produced in the way of a next next next ‘next’ underscored link in my chain, and could then go on, link by link, all down my seventy years, and prove to my perfect satisfaction that nothing has ever happened to me in all that time which could have happened to me if I had let that heel-cup alone. I haven’t any idea what the links were that led down to the heel-cup event and produced it, neither can I supply from my memory the long series of events stretching down through the next six years and caused by it—but 1847 1847 1847 inserted in the margin in my twelfth twelfth fifteenth fifteenth twelfth year another incident happened. My father died, and I was taken from school and put in a printing-office printing-office printing office . I was likely to remain there forever. I had to have an accident in order to get out of it. 1850 1850 1850 inserted in the margin My elder brother brother brother, corrected on the typewriter brother, came up from St. Louis and furnished it by providing me an equally unpromising place in a printing-office printing-office printing office of his own. “Nothing “Nothing Nothing but another accident could get me free and give me another start. Circumstances enabled me to furnish it myself. 1853 1853 1853 inserted in the margin I ran away from home and was gone a year. A series of accidents—that is to say, circumstances—shipped me to St. Louis, then to New York, then to Philadelphia, then to Muscatine, Iowa, then to Keokuk; and by this time I was twenty-one twenty-one twenty-two twenty-two nineteen 21 years old. 1856 1856 1856 inserted in the margin I was likely to remain in Keokuk forever, but another accident, decreed by Adam’s first act and thereby made unavoidable, came to my rescue. I had been longing to explore the Amazon River and open its head-waters to a great trade in coca coca cocoa , but I hadn’t any money to get to the Amazon with. But for the accident thrown in my way, at this time, by Adam’s first act, I should never have even got started toward the Amazon. That accident was a fifty-dollar fifty-dollar fifty-dollar bill. I found it in the street 1857 1857 1857 inserted in the margin on a winter’s morning. I advertised it in order to find the owner, and then I immediately left for Cincinnati for fear I might succeed if I waited. At Cincinnati I took passage in the Paul Jones for New Orleans, on my way to the Amazon. When I had been in New Orleans a couple of days my money was all gone and I had found out that there was no ship leaving for the Amazon that year, that year, that year, nor any likelihood that a ship would be leaving for the Amazon during the next century. “It “It It was imperatively necessary that another accident should come to my help. Exactly at the moment foreordained by Adam’s first act it arrived. On the way down the river I had gotten acquainted with one of the pilots of the Paul Jones, and I went to him now and begged him to make a pilot of me. It was by accident that I had made his acquaintance. Ordinarily he would not have wanted my society in the pilot-house, and would have enabled me to find it out; but on the day that I entered it one of his accidents happened to be due. He was suffering from a malady, or a pain of some kind, and was hardly able to stand at the wheel, so he was grateful for my advent. He gave the wheel to me and sat on the high bench and superintended my efforts while I learned how to steer. Thenceforth to New Orleans I steered for him every day all through his watch. If he hadn’t had that pain I should not have made his acquaintance, and my entire career, down to this day, would have been changed, and by a new train of accidents I should have drifted into the ministry or the penitentiary, or the grave, or somewhere, and should not have been heard of again. “When “When When the war broke out, three or four years later, I had been a pilot a couple of years or more, and was receiving so sumptuous a wage that I regarded myself as a rich man. I was without occupation now; the river was closed to navigation; it was time for another accident to happen or I should be drifting toward the ministry and the penitentiary again. Of course the accident happened. My elder brother was appointed Secretary of the new Territory of Nevada, and as I had to pay his passage across the continent I went along with him to see if I could find something to do out there on the frontier. By and by I went out to the Humboldt mines. The expedition was a failure. 1861 1861 (’61) In the middle of ’61 I went down to the Esmeralda mines and scored another failure. By and by I found myself shoveling sand in a quartz mill at ten dollars a week and board. I lasted two weeks and was obliged to quit, the labor was so intolerably heavy and my muscles so incompetent. “Once “Once Once more there was no outlook, and I stood upon the very very very not in verge of the ministry or the penitentiary—nothing could save me but a new accident. Of course it happened. In those days everybody that had a mining claim a mining claim mining a mining claims corrected on the typewriter mining claims wrote descriptions of it and prophecies concerning its future richness, and published them in the Virginia City Enterprise, and published . . . Enterprise, and published . . . Enterprise, and I had been doing the like with my worthless mining claims claims claims claim . Now then, just as a new accident was imperatively necessary to save me from the ministry and the penitentiary, it happened. Chief Justice Chief Justice Chief-Justice Turner came down there and delivered an oration. I was not present, but I knew his subject subject speech subject and I knew what he would say about it, and how he would say it, and that into it he would inject inject project inject all his pet quotations. I knew that he would scatter through it the remark about somebody’s lips having been sweetened by ‘the sweetened by ‘the “sweetened by “the honey of the bees of Hymettus,’ Hymettus,’ Hymettus,” and the remark that ‘Whom ‘Whom “Whom the gods would destroy they first make mad,’ mad,’ mad.” and the one which says ‘Against ‘Against “Against the stupid, stupid, stupid, stupid even the gods strive in vain.’ vain.’ vain.” He had a dozen other pet prettinesses and I knew them all, for I had heard him orate a good many times. He had an exceedingly flowery style, style, style, style and I knew how to imitate it. He could charm an audience an hour on a a the a stretch without ever getting rid of an idea. Every now and then he would wind up an empty sentence with a flourish and say, say, say, ‘Again,’ ‘Again,’ “Again,” ‘ “Again,” ’ underscored and then go on with another emptiness which he pretended was a confirmation confirmation convincing confirmation of the preceding one. At the end he would say, say, say, ‘To sum up’ ‘To sum up’ “To sum up” ‘ “To sum up” ’ underscored —and then go on and smoothly and eloquently sum up everything he hadn’t said, and his audience would go away enchanted. “I “I I didn’t hear his speech, as I have already said, but I made a report of it, anyway, and got in all the pet pet big pet phrases; and although the burlesque was rather extravagant, it was easily recognizable by the whole Territory as being a smart imitation. 1862 1862 1862 inserted in the margin It was published in the Enterprise, Enterprise Territorial Enterprise and just in the nick of time to save me. That paper’s city editor was going East for three months and by return mail by return mail by return mail I was offered his place for that interval. interval. interval. by return mail. “That “That That accident had in it prodigious consequences for me, although I did not suspect it at the time, of course. Like all our other accidents, it happened on the minute, on the second, on the fraction of a second. No accident ever comes late; it always arrives precisely on time. When that one happened I had never been so near the ministry in my life. “I “I I took that berth berth berth, berth , and during my occupancy of it I had to go to Carson City, the capital, and report the proceedings of the legislature legislature Legislature . 1864 1864 1864 inserted in the margin Every Sunday I wrote a letter to the paper, in which I made a resumé resumé resumeé accent added of the week’s legislative work, and in order that it might be readable I put no end of seasoning into it. I signed these letters ‘Mark Twain.’ ‘Mark Twain.’ “Mark Twain.” “Signing “Signing Signing them in that way was another accident which had been decreed by Adam’s first act. It was the cause of my presently drifting out of journalism and into literature. I could go on, now, and trace everything that has ever happened to me since, in all these forty years, straight back to that accident. Out of it grew, two years later, the accident which gave me a correspondence-job correspondence-job correspondence-job correspondence job to live on when I was discharged from the San Francisco Morning Call; 1866 1866 1866 inserted in the margin out of that correspondence grew the accident of my being sent to the Sandwich Islands for the Sacramento Union; out of that accident grew a notoriety which enabled me to mount the lecture platform when I was once more penniless and pointed for the ministry; 1867 1867 1867 inserted in the margin out ministry; out ministry;. Oout period mended to a semicolon; ‘O’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ of the lecture accident resulted my opportunity to join the Quaker City Excursion Excursion excursion ; out of that excursion grew the accident of an invitation to write ‘The Innocents Abroad’ ‘The Innocents Abroad’ “The Innocents Abroad” and become profitably notorious all over America; out of that same accident grew the accident of my stepping into Charley Langdon’s stateroom one day when the ship lay at anchor in the Bay of Smyrna and finding on his table a likeness of his sister, whom I was to seek out within the year and marry two years later; out later; out later;. Oout period mended to a semicolon; ‘O’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ of this happy accident accident incident accident corrected on the typewriter incident resulted a thousand other happy accidents, link after link, year after year, until the chain reached down to you and your affairs, a week ago, 1906 1906 1906 inserted in the margin and enabled me to do you a service which you believe could not have been done for you by any other person with whom you are acquainted. To my mind, it is absolutely certain that if ever a link, a single link, a link of the most apparently trifling sort, sort, sort, in the chain that stretches back from me to Adam, had ever been broken, there is no likelihood, nor even a remote possibility, that you and I would ever have looked into each other’s faces in this life.” life.” life.