21 March 1906 Wednesday, March 21, 1906 title Wednesday, March 21, 1906 Wednesday, March 21, 1906. Wednesday, Dictated March 21, 1906 ‘March’ underscored Mental telegraphy—Letter from Mr. Jock Brown—Search for Dr. John Brown’s letters a failure—Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell and his wife, Harmony, have an adventure in Scotland—Mr. Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s picture of a military execution—Letter relating to foundation of the Players Club—The mismanagement which caused Mr. Clemens to be expelled from the Club Club club —He is now an honorary member. Certainly mental telegraphy is an industry which is always silently at work—oftener than otherwise, perhaps, otherwise, perhaps, otherwise, perhaps, first comma written over a typed comma otherwise, perhaps, when we are not suspecting suspecting suspecting, no doubt, suspecting that it is affecting our thought. A few weeks ago when I was dictating something about Dr. John Brown of Edinburgh and our pleasant relations with him during six weeks there, and his pleasant relations with our little child, Susy Susy Susiey Susy , he had not been in my mind for a good while—a year, perhaps—but he has often been in my mind since, and his name has been frequently upon my lips and as frequently falling from the point of my pen. About a fortnight ago I began to plan an article about him and about Marjorie Fleming, whose first biographer he was, and yesterday I began the article. To-day comes a letter from his son Jock, from whom I had not previously heard for a good many years. He has been engaged in collecting his father’s letters for publication. This labor would naturally bring me into his mind with some frequency, and I judge that his mind telegraphed his thoughts to me across the Atlantic. I imagine that we get most of our thoughts out of somebody else’s head, by mental telegraphy—and not always out of heads of acquaintances but, in the majority of cases, out of the heads of strangers; strangers far removed—Chinamen, Hindoos, and all manner of remote foreigners whose language we should not be able to understand, but whose thoughts we can read without difficulty. 7 Greenhill Place Edinburgh centered 7 Greenhill Place centered Edinburgh centered 7 Greenhill Place centered Edinburgh 2 ems from the right “7 Greenhill Place. indented below previous line Edinburgh. 8th March, 1906. Dear Mr Mr Mr Mr. Clemens, I hope you remember me, Jock, son of Dr Dr Dr Dr. John Brown. At my father’s death I handed to Dr Dr Dr Dr. J. T. Brown all the letters I had to my father, as he intended to write his life, being his cousin and life long friend. He did write a memoir, published after his death in 1901, but he made no use of the letters and it was little more than a critique of his writings. If you care to see it I shall send it. Among the letters which I got back in 1902 were some from you and Mrs Mrs Mrs Mrs. Clemens. I have now got a large number of letters written by my father between 1830 and 1882 and intend publishing a selection in order to give the public an idea of the man he was. This I think they will do. Miss E. T. MacLaren is to add the necessary notes. I now write to ask you if you have letters from him and if you will let me see them and use them. I enclose letters from yourself and Mrs Mrs Mrs Mrs. Clemens which I should like to use, 15 sheets typewritten. Though I did not write as I should to you on the death of Mrs Mrs Mrs Mrs. Clemens, I was very sorry to hear of it through the papers, and as I now read these letters, she rises before me, gentle and loveable loveable loveable lovable as I knew her. I do hope you will let me use her letter, it is most beautiful. I also hope you will let me use yours. . . . yours. . . . yours. ¶ I have been married 16 years to my Cousin M. McKay. I have a son and daughter, 14 and 12 years old. I send their photos. I think you lost one of your daughters. I hope the others are well and that you are also in good health. ¶ Please return all the types even though I may not use some of them. canceled by SLC yours. . . . I am Yours very sincerely John Brown I am Yours very sincerely John Brown I am Yours very sincerely John Brown typed Samuel L. Clemens, Esq., Mark Twain New York City, U. S. A. handwritten by Brown, canceled by SLC I am, Yours very sincerely, John Brown. We have searched for Doctor John’s letters but without success. I do not understand this. There ought to be a good many, and none should be missing, for Mrs. Clemens held Doctor John in such love and reverence that his letters were sacred things in her eyes and she preserved them and took watchful care of them. During our ten years’ absence in Europe many letters and like memorials became scattered and lost, but I think it unlikely that Doctor John’s have suffered this fate. I think we shall find them yet. These thoughts about Jock These thoughts about Jock These thoughts about Jock . . . .These thoughts about Jock Dr. John Brown (author of “Rab and His Friends”) bring back to me the Edinburgh of thirty-three years ago, and the thought of Edinburgh brings to my mind one of Reverend Joe Twichell’s Reverend Joe Twichell’s Rev. Joe Twitchell’s Rev. Joe Twichell’s T.’s Twichell’s adventures. A quarter of a century ago, Twichell and Harmony, his wife, Twichell and Harmony, his wife, Twitchell and Harmony, his wife, Twichell he and Harmony, his wife, visited Europe for the first time, and made a stay of a day or two in Edinburgh. They were devotees of Scott, and they devoted that day or two to ransacking Edinburgh for things and places made sacred by contact with the Magician of the North. Toward midnight, on the second night, they were returning to their lodgings on foot; a dismal and steady rain was falling, and by consequence they had George street street Street all to themselves. Presently the rainfall became so heavy that they took refuge from it in a deep doorway, and there in the black darkness they discussed with satisfaction all the achievements of the day. Then Joe Joe Joe Joe T. said: “It has been hard work, and a heavy strain on the strength, but we have our reward. There isn’t a thing connected with Scott in Edinburgh that we haven’t seen or touched—not one. I mean the things a stranger could have access to. There is one we haven’t seen, but it’s not accessible—a private collection of relics and memorials of Scott of great interest, but I do not know where it is. I can’t get on the track of it. I wish we could, but we can’t. We’ve got to give the idea up. It would be a grand thing to have a sight of that collection, Harmony.” Harmony.” Harmony.” Harmony.” my dear.” A voice out of the darkness said “Come up stairs up stairs upstairs and I will show it to you!” you!” you.” you.!” period mended to an exclamation point And the voice was as good as its word. The voice belonged to the gentleman who owned the collection. He took Joe and Harmony Joe and Harmony Joe and Harmony Joe and Harmony the couple up stairs up stairs upstairs , fed them and refreshed them; and while they examined the collection he chatted and explained. When they left at two in the morning they realized that they had had the star time of their trip. Joe Joe Joe Joe . . . . . Twichell has always been on hand when anything was going to happen—except once. He got delayed in some unaccountable unaccountable vexatious and unaccountable vexatious and unaccountable way, or he would have been blown up at Petersburg when the mined defences defences defenses of that place were flung heavenward in the Civil War Civil War civil war . When I was in Hartford the When I was in Hartford the When I was in Hartford the When I was in Hartford tThe ‘t’ underscored three times to capitalize other day he told me about another of his long string of providential opportunities. I think he thinks Providence is always looking out for him when interesting things are going to happen. I think . . . happen. I think . . . happen. I think . . . happen. This was the execution of some deserters during the Civil War Civil War civil war . When we read about such things in history we always have one and one and not in one and the same picture—blindfolded men kneeling with their heads bowed; a file of stern and alert soldiers fronting them with their muskets ready; an austere officer in uniform standing apart who gives sharp terse orders, “Make ready. Take aim. Fire!” Fire!” Fire.” Fire.!” period mended to an exclamation point There is a belch belch belch belch gush of flame and smoke, the victims fall forward expiring, the file shoulders arms, wheels, marches erect and stiff-legged off the field, and the incident is closed. Joe’s Joe’s Joe’s Joe’s Twichell’s picture is different. And I suspect that it is the true one—the common one. In this picture the deserters requested that they might be allowed to stand, not kneel; that they might not be blindfolded, blindfolded, blindfolded blindfolded, but permitted to look the firing file in the eye. Their request was Their request was These requests were Theire requests were was granted. They They The men They men stood erect and soldierly; they kept their color, they did not blench; their eyes were steady. But these things could not be said of any other person present. But . . . person present. But . . . of the persons present. But . . . of the persons present. ‘But . . . person present.’ underscored A General of Brigade General of Brigade general of brigade sat upon his horse white-faced—white as a corpse. The officer commanding the squad was white-faced—white as a corpse. The firing file were white-faced, white-faced, white-faced white-faced, and their forms wobbled wobbled waobbled wobbled so that the wobble wobble waobble wobble was transmitted to their muskets when they took aim. The officer of the squad could not command his voice, voice, voice, voice, and his tone was weak and poor, not brisk and stern. When the file had done its deadly work it did not march away martially erect and stiff-legged stiff-legged stillff-legged stiff-legged . It wobbled wobbled waobbled wobbled . This picture commends itself to me as being the truest one that any one has yet furnished of a military execution. In searching for Dr. Brown’s letters—a failure—we have made a find which we were not expecting. Evidently it marks the foundation of the Players Club, and so it has value for me. Daly’s Theatre Daly’s Theatre Daly’s Theatre “Daly’s Theatre. Daly’s Theatre. under the management of Augustin Daly. managers office. under the management of Augustin Daly. managers office. under the management of Augustin Daly. managers office. not in New York, Jan 2d 1888. New York, Jan 2d 1888. New York, Jan 2d 1888. ‘New York,’ and ‘188 .’ printed; month, day, and year inserted by hand New York, Jan. 2, 1888. New York, Jan. 2, 1888 Mr Augustin Mr Augustin Mr Augustin Mr. Augustusin Mr. Augustin Daly will be very much pleased to have Mr Mr Mr Mr. S. L. Clemens meet Mr Mr Mr Mr. Booth, Mr Mr Mr Mr. Barrett and Mr Mr Mr Mr. Palmer and a few friends at Lunch Lunch Lunch lunch on Friday next next next next, January 6th 6th 6th 6th (at one oclock oclock oclock o’clock in Delmonico’s) to discuss the formation of a new club which it is thought will claim your interest. R. S. V. P. R.S.V.P. R.S.V.P. R.S.V.P.” All the founders, founders, founders, founders, I think, think, think, think, were present at that luncheon—among them Booth, Barrett, Palmer, General Sherman, Bispham, Aldrich, and the rest. I do not recall the other names. I think Laurence Laurence Lawrence Hutton states in one of his books that the Club’s name—The Players—had been already selected and accepted before this luncheon took place, but I take that to be a mistake. I remember that several names were proposed, discussed, and abandoned at the luncheon; that finally Thomas Bailey Thomas Bailey Thomas Bailey Thomas Bailey Aldrich suggested that compact and simple name, The Players; and that even that happy title was not immediately accepted. However the discussion was very brief. The objections to it were easily routed and driven from the field, and the vote in its favor was unanimous. I lost my interest in the Club three years ago—for cause—but it has lately returned to me, to my great satisfaction. Mr. Mr. Mr Mr. Booth’s bequest was a great and generous one—but he left two. The other one was not much of a benefaction. It was Magonigle Magonigle MacGonigal , a foolish old relative of his who needed a support. As Secretary he governed the Club and its Board of Managers like an autocrat from the beginning until three or four months ago, when he retired from his position superannuated. From the beginning, I left my dues and costs to be paid by my business agent in Hartford—Mr. Whitmore. He attended to all business of mine. I interested myself in none of it. When we went to Europe in ’91 I left a written order in the Secretary’s office continuing Whitmore in his function of paymaster of my club dues. Nothing happened until a year had gone by. Then a bill for dues reached me in Europe. I returned it to Magonigle Magonigle MacGonigal and reminded him of my order, which had not been changed. Then for a couple of years the bills went to Whitmore, after which a bill came to me in Europe. I returned it with the previous remarks repeated. But about every two years the sending of bills to me would be resumed. I sent them back with the usual remarks. Twice the bills were accompanied by offensive letters from the Secretary. These I answered profanely. At last we came home, 1901 1901 not in typed in the margin in 1901 1901 190i1 1901 . No bills came to me for a year. Then we took a residence at Riverdale-on-the-Hudson, and straightway came a Players bill for dues. I was aweary, aweary, and I put it in the waste-basket. Ten days later the bill came again, and with it a shadowy threat. I waste-basketed it. I waste-basketed it. I waste-basketed it. I waste-basketed it. After another ten days the bill came once more, and this time the threat was in a concreted condition. It said very peremptorily that if the bill were not paid within a week I would be expelled from the Club Club club and posted as a delinquent. This went the way of its predecessors into the waste-basket. On the named day I was expelled and posted—and I was much gratified, for I was tired of being Magonigled Magonigled MacGonigaled every little while. Robert Reid, David Munro, and other special friends in the Club Club club were astonished and put themselves in communication with me to find out what this strange thing meant. I explained to them. They wanted me to state the case to the Management and require a reconsideration of the decree of expulsion, but I had to decline that proposition. And therefore things remained as they were until a few months ago when the Magonigle Magonigle MacGonigal retired from the autocracy. The boys thought that my return to the Club Club club would be plain and simple sailing now, but I thought differently. I was no longer a member. I could not become a member without consenting to be voted for like any other candidate, and I would not do that. The Management had expelled me upon the mere statement of a clerk that I was a delinquent. Neither they nor the clerk could know whether I ever received those bills and threats or not, since they had been transmitted by the mail. They had not asked me to testify in my defence defence defense . Their books would show that I had never failed to pay, and pay promptly. They might properly argue from that that I had not all of a sudden become a rascal, and that I might be able to explain the situation if asked. The Board’s whole proceeding had been like all the Board’s proceedings from the beginning—arbitrary, insolent, stupid. That Board’s proper place, from the beginning, was the idiot asylum. I could not allow myself to be voted for again, again, again, again, because from my view of the matter I had never lawfully and legitimately ceased to be a member. However, when Providence disposed of Magonigle Magonigle MacGonigal , a way fair and honorable to all concerned was easily found to bridge the separating crack. I was made an honorary member, and I have been glad to resume business at the old stand.