22 January 1907 Tuesday, January 22, 1907 Tuesday, January 22, 1907 Tuesday, Dictated Jan. 22, 1907. ‘Jan. 22’ underscored; SLC made the revisions, and Munro marked the dateline to precede ‘In an earlier’ at 376.27 Tuesday, Jan. 22, 1907. [Dictated January 22, 1907.] Authorship of the lines beginning “Love Came at Dawn Came at Dawn came at dawn ”—Also authorship of lines inscribed on Susy’s gravestone—Mr. Clemens will try his billiard scheme for winning bets from Mr. Dooley when he comes to play billiards on Friday—Tells how he tried it on Mr. George George Geo. Robinson, long ago. In an earlier chapter I inserted some verses beginning “Love Came at Dawn Came at Dawn cCame at dDawn Came at Dawn ” which had been found among Susy’s papers after her death. I was not able to say that they were hers, but I judged that they might be, for the reason that she had not enclosed them in quotation marks according to her habit when storing up treasures gathered from other people. Stedman was not able to determine the authorship for me, as the verses were new to him, but the authorship has now been traced. The verses were written by William Wilfred Campbell, a Canadian poet, and they form a part of the contents of his book called “Beyond the Hills of Dream.” The authorship of the beautiful lines which my wife and I inscribed upon Susy’s gravestone was untraceable for a time. We had found them in a book in India, but had lost the book, book, book, book and with it the author’s name. But in time an application to the editor of Notes and Queries Notes and Queries Notes and Queries “Notes and Queries” furnished me the author’s name,Robert Richardson, deceased, of Australia. name,* footnote: *Robert Richardson, deceased, of Australia. name,* footnote: *Robert Richardson, deceased, of Australia. name, name,* footnote: *Robert Richardson, deceased, of Australia. and it has been added to the verses upon the gravestone. Last night, at a dinner party dinner party dinner party dinner-party where I was present, Mr. Peter Dunne Mr. Peter Dunne Mr. Peter Dunne Mr. Peter Dunne Dooley handed to the host several dollars, in satisfaction of a lost bet. I seemed to see an opportunity to better my condition, and I invited Dooley, apparently disinterestedly, to come to my house Friday and play billiards. He accepted, and I judge that there is going to be a deficit in the Dooley treasury treasury family treasury family treasury as a result. In great qualities of the heart and brain, Dooley is gifted beyond all propriety. He is brilliant; he is an expert with his pen, and he he he he easily stands at the head of all the satirists of this generation—but he is going to walk in darkness Friday afternoon. It will be a fraternal kindness to teach him him him, him that with all his light and light and light, and with and all his and light, and with all his light and culture, he does not know all the valuable things valuable things valueable of a things valuable things ; and it will also be a fraternal kindness to him to complete his education for him—and I shall do do expect to do expect to do do this on Friday, and send him home in that perfected perfected perfected perfected condition. I possess a billiard secret which can be valuable to the Dooley sept sept sept sept, after I shall have conferred it upon Dooley— Dooley— him Dooley— him Dooley for a consideration. It is a discovery which I made by accident, thirty-eight years ago, in my father-in-law’s house in Elmira. There was a scarred and battered and ancient billiard table billiard table billiard-table in the garret, and along with it a peck of checked and chipped balls, and a rackful of crooked and headless cues. I played solitaire up there every day with that difficult outfit. The table was not level, but slanted sharply to the southeast southeast south-east southeast ; there wasn’t a ball that was round, or would complete the journey you started it on, but would always get tired and stop half way half way half way half-way and settle, with a jolty wobble, settle, with a jolty wobble, settle, with a jolty wobble, ‘jolty’ written in the margin, circled, and then canceled settle, with a jolty wobble, settle, with a jolty wabble, to a standstill on its chipped side. I tried making counts with four balls, but found it difficult and discouraging, so I so I and so I so I added a fifth ball, then a sixth, then a seventh, and kept on adding until at last I had twelve balls on the table and a thirteenth to play with. My game was caroms—caroms solely—caroms plain, or caroms with cushion to help—anything that could furnish a count. In the course of time I found to my astonishment that I was never able to run fifteen fifteen 15 fifteen , under any circumstances. By huddling the balls advantageously in the beginning, I could now and then coax fourteen fourteen 14 fourteen out of them, but I couldn’t reach fifteen fifteen 15 fifteen by either luck or skill. Sometimes the balls would get scattered into difficult positions and defeat me in that way; sometimes if I managed to keep them together I would freeze; and always when I froze, and had to play away from the contact, there was sure to be nothing to play at but a wide and uninhabited vacancy. One day Mr. Dillon Dillon Diallton Dalton called on my brother-in-law, on a matter of business, and I was asked if I could entertain him a while, until my brother-in-law should finish should finish had should finished should finish an engagement with another gentleman. I said I could, and took him up to the billiard table billiard table billiard-table . I had played with him many times at the club, and knew that he could play billiards tolerably well—only tolerably well— tolerably well—only tolerably well— pretty well, tolerably well—only tolerably well— pretty well, tolerably well—only tolerably well— but not any better than I could. He and I were just a match. He didn’t know our our that our our table; he didn’t know those balls; he didn’t know know know known those warped and headless cues; he didn’t know the southeastern southeastern south-eastern south-eastern slant of the table, and how to allow for it. I judged it would be safe and profitable to offer him a bet on my scheme. I emptied the avalanche of thirteen balls on the table and said, said, said, said: “Take a ball and begin, Mr. Dillon Dillon Diallton Dalton . How many can you run with an outlay like that?” He said, with the half-affronted half-affronted half affronted half-affronted air of a mathematician who has has had hads has been asked how much of the multiplication table he can can could could can can recite without a break, break, break, break: “I suppose a million—eight hundred thousand, anyway.” I said “You shall have the privilege of placing the balls to suit yourself, and I want to bet you a dollar that you can’t run fifteen fifteen 15 fifteen .” I will not dwell upon the sequel. At the end of an hour his face was red, and wet with perspiration; his outer garments lay scattered here and there over the place; he was the angriest man in the State, and there wasn’t a rag or remnant of an injurious adjective left in him anywhere—and I had all his small change. When the summer was over over over over, we went home to Hartford, and one day Mr. George Robinson Robinson Robinertson Robinson Roberston arrived from Boston with two or three hours to spare between then and the return train, and as he was a young gentleman to whom we were in debt for much social pleasure, it was my duty, and a welcome duty, to make his two or three hours interesting for him. So I took him up stairs up stairs upstairs up-stairs and set up my billiard scheme for his comfort. Mine was a good table, table, table, table, in perfect repair; the cues were in perfect condition; the balls were ivory, and flawless—but I knew that Mr. Robinson Robinson Robinertson Robinson Roberston was my prey, just the same, for by exhaustive tests with this outfit I had found that my limit was thirty-one thirty-one 31 thirty-one . I had proved to my satisfaction that whereas I could not fairly expect to get more than six or eight or a dozen caroms out of a run, I could now and then reach twenty twenty 20 twenty and twenty-five twenty-five 25 twenty-five , and after a long procession of failures finally achieve a run of thirty-one thirty-one 31 thirty-one ; but but but but in no case had I ever got beyond thirty-one thirty-one 31 thirty-one . Robinson’s Robinson’s Robinertson’s Robinson’s Roberston’s game, as I knew, was a little better than mine, so I resolved to require him to make thirty-two thirty-two 32 thirty-two . I believed it would entertain him. He was one of these brisk and hearty and cheery and self-satisfied self-satisfied self-satisfied self-satisfied young fellows who are brimful of confidence, and who plunge with grateful eagerness into any enterprise that offers a showy test of their abilities. I emptied the balls on the table and said, “Take a cue and a ball, George, and begin. How many caroms do you think you can make out of that layout layout lay-out layout ?” He laughed the laugh of the gay and the care-free care-free care-free care-free , as became his youth and inexperience, and said, “I can punch caroms out of that bunch a week without a break.” I said “Place the balls to suit yourself, and begin.” Confidence is a necessary thing in billiards, but over-confidence over-confidence over-confidence overconfidence is bad. George went at his task with much too much lightsomeness of spirit and disrespect for the situation. On his first shot he scored three caroms; on his second shot he scored four caroms; and on his third shot he missed as simple a carom as could be devised. He was very much astonished, and said he would not have supposed that careful play could be needed with an acre of bunched balls in front of a person. He began again, and played more carefully, but still with too much lightsomeness; he couldn’t seem to learn to take the situation seriously. He made about a dozen caroms, caroms, caroms, caroms and broke broke again broke broke down. He was irritated irritated irritated irritated with himself now, and he thought he caught me laughing. He didn’t. I do not laugh publicly at my client when this game is going on; I only do it inside—or save it for after the exhibition is over. But he thought he had caught me laughing, and it increased his irritation. Of course I knew he thought I knew he thought he knew I knew he thought I knew he thought I was laughing privately—for I was experienced; they all think that, and it has a good effect; it sharpens their annoyance and debilitates their play. He made another trial and failed. Once more he was astonished; once more he was humiliated—and as for his anger, it rose to summer-heat. summer-heat. the boiling point. summer-heat. summer-heat. He arranged the balls again, grouping them carefully, and said he would win this time, or die. When a client reaches this condition condition condition condition, it is a good time to damage his nerve further, and this can always be done by saying some little mocking thing or other that has the outside appearance of a friendly remark—so I employed this art. I suggested that a bet might tauten his nerves nerves nerves nerves , and that I would offer one, but that as I did not want it to be an expense to him, but only a help, I would make it small—a cigar, if he were willing—a cigar that he would fail again; again; again—; again; not an expensive one, but a cheap cheap cheap, cheap native one, of the Crown Jewel breed, such as is manufactured in Hartford for the clergy. It set him afire all over! over! over.! period mended to an exclamation point over! I could see the blue flame issue from his eyes. He said, “Make it a hundred! hundred! hundred! hundred! —and no Connecticut cabbage-leaf product, but Havanas Havanas Havanas Havana , twenty-five dollars twenty-five dollars $25. $25 the box! box! box.! period mended to an exclamation point box! ” I took him up, but said I was sorry to see him do this, because it did not seem to me right or fair for me for me for me for me to rob him under our own roof, when he had been so kind to us. He said, with energy and acrimony, energy and acrimony, energy, and acrimony, energy and acrimony: “You take care of your own pocket, if you’ll be so good, and leave me to take care of mine.” And he plunged at the congress of balls with a vindictiveness which was infinitely contenting to me. He scored a failure—and began to undress. I knew it would come to that, for he was in the condition now that Mr. Dooley will be in at about that stage of the contest on Friday afternoon. A clothes-rack will be provided for Mr. Dooley to hang his things on, as fast on, as fast on, as fast on as fast as he shall shall shall, shall, shall from time to time time time, time, time shed them. George raised his voice four degrees and flung out the challenge— challenge— challenge— challenge challenge— “Double or quits! quits! quits.! period mended to an exclamation point quits! ” “Done,” I responded, in the gentle and compassionate voice of one who is apparently getting sorrier and sorrier. There was an hour and a half of straight disaster after that, and if it was a sin to enjoy it, it is no matter—I did enjoy it. It is half a lifetime ago, but I enjoy it yet, every time I think of it. George made failure after failure. His fury increased with each failure as he scored it. With each defeat he flung off one or another rag of his raiment, and every time he started on a fresh inning he made it “double or quits” once more. Twice he reached thirty thirty 30 thirty and broke down; once he reached thirty-one thirty-one 31 thirty-one and broke down. These “nears” made him frantic, and I believe I was never so happy in my life, except the time, a few years later, when the Reverend Reverend Rev. J. H. Twichell and I walked to Boston and he had the celebrated conversation with the hostler at the Inn at Ashford, Connecticut. At last, when we were notified that Patrick was at the door to drive him to his train, George owed me five thousand cigars at twenty-five cents apiece, and I was so sorry I could have hugged him. But he shouted, shouted, shouted, shouted shouted, “Give me ten minutes more! more! more,! more! ” and added stormily, “it’s double or quits again, and I’ll win out free of debt or owe you ten thousand cigars, and you’ll pay the funeral expenses.” He began on his final effort, and I believe that in all my experience among both amateurs and experts experts experts experts, I have never seen a cue so carefully handled in my lifetime as George handled his upon this intensely interesting occasion. He got safely up to twenty-five twenty-five 25 twenty-five , and then ceased to breathe. So did I. He labored along, and added a point, another point, still another point, and finally reached thirty-one thirty-one 31 thirty-one . He stopped there, and we took a breath. By this time the balls were scattered all down the cushions, scattered all down the cushions, all over the table, scattered all down the cusions,miswriting all over the table, scattered all down the cushions, about a foot or two apart, and there wasn’t a shot in sight anywhere that any man might hope to make. In a burst of anger and confessed defeat, he sent his ball flying around the table at random, and it crotched a ball that was packed against the cushion and sprang across across thence across thence across to a ball against the bank on the opposite side, side, side, side, and counted! counted! counted.! period mended to an exclamation point counted! His luck had set him free, and he didn’t owe me anything. He had used up all his spare time, but we carried his clothes to the carriage carriage carriage carriage, and he dressed on his way to the station, greatly wondered at and admired by the ladies, as he drove along—but he got his train. I am very fond of Mr. Dooley, and shall await his coming with affectionate and pecuniary interest. P.S. Saturday. He has been here. Let us not talk about it. P.S. Saturday. He has been here. Let us not talk about it. P.S. Saturday. Let us not talk about it. not in P.S. Saturday. He has been here. Let us not talk about it. P.S. Saturday. He has been here. Let us not talk about it.