28 April 1908 Dictated April 28, 1908 “Lord Dundreary” as played by the elder Sothern and by his son. Lord Dundreary has been revived, after an age-long silence, and is being played by Sothern’s son. When my lord came on the stage the sight of him almost gave me a graveyard shiver; for the reproduction in face, form, manner and costume, of the Dundreary of a quarter of a century ago was nearly nearly nearly perfect in every detail, and it seemed to me for a moment that this was the long-ago dead man up and around again. I can distinctly remember the last time that I saw the elder Sothern play Dundreary. It must be all of twenty-five years ago, I should say. It was in Hartford. The reason I remember it so well is, that is, that is, that I couldn’t keep my laughter within reasonable bounds, and was presently pretty nearly, and very uncomfortably, dividing the house’s attention with the actor—and so for decency’s sake I got up and went out in the midst of the performance. In those days it was the funniest thing I had ever seen on the stage, and I find that it is just as funny now as it was then. I saw it yesterday. I am old and intelligent and intelligent and intelligent now, and by earnest and watchful effort was able to keep from going into hysterics over it, but there were others present who had not my luck. A girl in the next box to me was a positive calamity to the actors. She kept up a continual shriek of laughter that made it difficult for them to look unconscious of her and keep their attention upon their work. A generation ago, Dundreary made in London the first long-run record of modern times. Sothern played it there every night for a couple of years, at a time when a hundred nights was a long run, and two hundred an extraordinary one. It was said that Sothern’s people became practically idiotic from saying and doing the same things every night for months and months on a stretch, and had to be laid off periodically to save their rotting mentality. Daniel Frohman and his wife have been dining with us, and Frohman said that when Laura Keene accepted the play and staged it here in New York, she cast Sothern for Dundreary’s part and he refused to play it. He was a stock actor on a moderate salary, but Dundreary was altogether too minor a part for even him. There were only seventeen lines of it, and nothing in the seventeen lines worth saying; besides they furnished no occasion for acting, and Sothern said that as between playing Dundreary and a a not in deaf and dumb Roman soldier, he would prefer the gentleman in the tin armor. Frohman said that in this emergency Laura Keene did what no manager ought ever to do—she gave up her mastership and told Sothern that if he would play the part he might do whatever he pleased with it. Sothern accepted the terms and took such liberal advantage of them that before long he was become the chief figure on the stage, and presently almost the only figure, and was talking fifteen words to anybody else’s one. The piece’s name, “The American Cousin,” sank out of sight and remained out of sight and hearing permanently. The piece came to be called “Lord Dundreary;” it is called so yet, and there is almost nothing left of the play; it isn’t a play any longer, it is only a monologue, and nobody cares for anything in it but the idiotic and fascinating nobleman.