31 August 1907 Dictated August August Aug. 31, 1907 The Punch dinner continued—Little Joy Agnew presents Mr. Clemens with original of Punch cartoon—Copy of a letter from Joy Agnew to Mr. Clemens; also copy of his reply to it. A few days earlier Punch had contained a cartoon in which that illustrious old gentleman was represented as “doing himself the honor” to drink my health. The full strength of the Punch staff sat at the dinner, with Mr. Agnew, the editor-in-chief editor-in-chief editor in chief , at the head of the table. Nearly all the men were young, and new to me—in fact all except three: Linley Sambourne, Sir Francis Burnand, and Mr. Lucy. I had known Mr. Lucy a number of years, and Sambourne and Burnand a full generation. In these chairs had sat, fifty years ago, Leech, Tenniel Tenniel Teniel , Douglas Jerrold, and others of the great departed, and I had a sort of sense that their viewless ghosts were present and approving. When all were seated and the and the and and the napkins about to be lifted, I was warned in a low voice that a solemnity was about to take place. An impressive stillness and silence followed, which lasted as much as a minute, perhaps; then a closet door sprang open and out of it flitted a little little lovely little fairy decked out in pink, like a rose, and came tripping toward me, her face all alive with smiles and excitement; and she bore in her hands the framed original of the Punch cartoon—a picture half as big as herself. She stopped near me, dropped a courtesy, and delivered, with charming grace and animation and well-taught expression, a touching and beautiful little speech in my honor. I took the picture from her hands, but before I could control my voice enough to even murmur a “Thank you” she had dropped another courtesy and flown to the refuge of her closet. This is the prettiest prettiest loveliest prettiest incident of my long life, I think, I think, I think, and I cannot think of it yet without a thrill at my heart and quickened pulse-beat. The little sprite was Joy Agnew, eight years of age, daughter of the editor-in-chief editor-in-chief editor in chief . Naturally she got a unanimous a unanimous an enthusiastic a unanimous recall, and so she came lightly tripping back and climbed up into her father’s lap and sat there, rosy and sweet, and altogether adorable, and lit up the whole place with her fresh young loveliness and sanctified it with her innocence. She remained half an hour; hour; hour,; comma mended to a semicolon then, under parental compulsion, she said her good-bye and was escorted away by a servant. She went reluctantly, and said she had never been allowed in that place before, and thought she wouldn’t be allowed to come again. She was the feature of that banquet, the ever-memorable feature of it, the feature without rival or competitor—I I I, the chief guest, confess it without jealousy. jealousy. a pang. jealousy. It took a while to get over the dazzle and exaltation of that bright vision; then we pulled ourselves together and had a lively time, with speeches and other hilarities. I think Miss Joy asked me for an autographed portrait; at any rate I sent her one, and in return she wrote me a letter worth a hundred hundred hundred and fifty of it; I received it a few days after I reached home, in America. As a child’s letter, I think it is perfect; perfect in its frankness, its simplicity, and in its unquestioning and well placed confidence that I would would shall would be interested in the deep concerns of the little writer’s life. I will copy her letter here. In closing it she says “I hope you will remember me for I am yours respec respec respec struck through but left legible affectionately Joy Agnew.” She saw that that word was too distant, too cold, too formal, for the relations existing between her and me, so she stopped it in the middle and drove a single pen-stroke through it, which did not at all disguise it. An older and more artful person would have obliterated it, and pretended that he had had no such thought in his mind, but the child was open and honest, and in her heart there was no place for subterfuges. 15th of July 1907. Mondaylittlecourt, farthingstone, weedon. My dear Mr. Mark Twain, Thank you so much for the beautiful picture you sent me. It was very kind of you to think of me. We have a lovely garden, full of a lot of flowers We have also a good lot of pets too. I will tell you what they are. Mine are; three bantams, three goldfish, three doves, six canarys, two dogs and one cat My brother Ewan who is at Eton now has; nine goldfish, one cat, one dog, and a pony. My Daddy has one dog. Mummy has a lot of hens and some bees. We have a little garden of our own and Daddy is going to make us a see-saw. Ofcourse this is all in the country. I am going to a wedding on Thursday. I hope you will remember me for I am yours respec affectionately Joy Agnew. REPLY. REPLY. (Copy) REPLY. Tuxedo Park Park Park Park. New York. 1907 1907 1907 not in Unto you greeting and salutation and worship, you dear sweet little rightly-named Joy! I can see you now almost as vividly as I saw you that night when you sat flashing and beaming upon those sombre swallow-tails swallow-tails swallow-tails SLC added some punctuation, then obliterated it with ink swallow-tails “Fair as a star when only one Is shining in the sky.” Oh, you were indeed the only one—there wasn’t even the remotest chance of competition with you, dear! Ah, you are a decoration, you little witch! witch! witch.! period mended to an exclamation point witch! The idea of your house going to the wanton expense of a flower garden!—aren’t you enough? And what do you want to go and discourage the other flowers for? Is that the right spirit? is it considerate? is it kind? How do you suppose they feel when you come around—looking the way you look? And you so pink and sweet and dainty and lovely and supernatural? Why, it makes them feel embarrassed and artificial, of course; and in my opinion it is just as pathetic as it can be. Now then, you want to reform, dear, and do right. Well certainly you are well off, Joy: 3 bantams; 3 goldfish; 3 doves; 6 canarys; 2 dogs; 1 cat. All you need, now, to be permanently beyond the reach of want, is one more dog—just one more good, gentle, high-principled, affectionate, loyal dog who wouldn’t want any nobler service than the golden privilege of lying at your door, nights, and biting everything that came along—and I am that very one, and ready to come at the dropping of a hat. Do you think you could convey my love and thanks to your “daddy” and Owen Seaman, and Partridge, Seaman, and Partridge, Seaman, and Partridge, Seaman, and Partridge, and those other oppressed and down-trodden subjects of yours, you darling small tyrant? On my knees! These—with the kiss of fealty from your other subject— Mark Twain.