8 April 1907 Monday, April 8, 1907 The battles of Navarino and Lepanto and the princes of Montenegro: all an annoyance to Mr. Clemens—Mr. William William Wm. T. Stead appoints Mr. Clemens a member of the International Peace Convention; he and Mr. Stead discuss the appointment—President Roosevelt the most popular human being that ever sojourned in America—Copy of letter in form of essay bearing on subjects recently discussed by Mr. Clemens. I note with satisfaction that the last survivor of the battle of Navarino is dead. Perhaps we shall now have a rest from that battle. I seem to be including everybody, but it is merely a manner of speech; I am meaning only myself. The battle of Navarino has been an annoyance to me all my life. I cannot remember back to the time when the mention of that battle did not irritate me. It is not that I had any grudge against the battle itself; it is only that I never could separate it from the battle of Lepanto. I know of nothing that is more troublesome than a confusion of that kind; we all have them; no one is free from them; they embitter life and make existence a weariness. I have always known that it was in one of these battles that Cervantes was wounded, but I never could tell which battle it was without consulting the Cyclopedia Cyclopedia Cyclopaedia again. I have worn out many and many a Cyclopedia Cyclopedia Cyclopaedia in settling which battle it was, but I never could make the information stay after I had acquired it. I have consulted the Cyclopedia Cyclopedia Cyclopaedia again, and this time I find, as usual, that it was in the Lepanto fight that Cervantes was wounded. It is the hundred and fiftieth time that I have found that out, and it is about the hundredth time that I have wished he had been wounded in both those battles; then I could keep his record clear and my own mind at rest. The fact that one of the battles was older than the other by about three centuries is of no help to me; in my muddled head they stick together, and I cannot separate them. But the thing that interests me is the curious fact that I should get a personal satisfaction out of the death of the last survivor of Navarino, for I had nothing against him; I was only tired of his battle. Now then—but never mind, let it go; it is not worth while to try to analyze my feeling; I should never be able to do it; it is like the feeling which I have harbored against the princes of Montenegro for forty years. That name always irritates me; still there is something like a definite reason for it—a trivial one, and yet, in effect, a reason. Forty years ago, when a party of us representing the Quaker City Excursion were examining the sights of Paris and arrived at the tomb of Napoleon, we were halted outside and informed that the Prince of Montenegro was visiting the tomb and we must wait until he was done with it. We were kept outside half an hour, and time was very precious to us cheap pilgrims. I had never heard of him before, but I inquired and found that he owned a farm in the neighborhood of Turkey somewhere, and raised rocks on it—not an important farm, but since it was a principality it made the Prince of Montenegro a person of consequence and set him up among the royalties. Years afterward, when I had acquired a family and we were traveling about Europe, I engaged rooms by telegraph in a hotel in Venice and when we arrived there, tired and worn, we found our quarters occupied. The landlord explained that he had been obliged to give them to the Prince of Montenegro, who had arrived unexpectedly. These were the beginnings of a procession of interruptions of my comfort and repose, by the princes of Montenegro, which has extended down to the present time. I do not go to Europe any more, on account of the princes of Montenegro. They have stepped into my way as many as a dozen times; they have been one of the chief annoyances of my life; their name is a perennial disturbance to me whenever and wherever I see it. Lepanto, Navarino, Montenegro: these have permanently embittered me against all names that end with o o o ‘o’ underscored . It seems a trivial thing that I should be affected by such small matters as these, and yet it is only natural, since all human concerns are trivial, and these are as large as any of them. And this reminds me that I came across William T. Stead yesterday. He is over here to take part in an International Peace Convention which is to assemble a week or ten days from now. His project is to select one or two widely known men in each country and band them together in a commission, which shall visit all the presidents and crowned heads and persuade them to endorse and support a proposition to be laid before this year’s Hague Tribunal. The idea is to have that Tribunal pass an international law requiring quarreling States about to go to war to postpone overt action until thirty days after they shall have made up their minds to draw the sword. This is to give time for the other States of Christendom to try to pacify the belligerents and compromise the quarrel, and prevent the war. As one of the members of the American contingent of this roving commission, Mr. Stead had nominated me, but I told him I could not serve; that my active days were over, and that even short journeys were a distress to me, and I could not think of venturing a long one. He said it was hardly my privilege to decline this great service; that it was my duty to do everything that in me lay to advance the human race, as long as the breath should remain in my body. But I said it was not worth while, for the reason that you can’t advance the human race and make it stay advanced; that every time you propped up its wobbling form on one side it toppled over on the other; that all its affairs are transitory transitory evanescent transitory and unstable, and none of them important, for that reason; that all ameliorations of the condition of the human race are impermanent; as soon as you reform them in one particular the race breaks out, in another place, worse than ever; that it is a weary and unprofitable enterprise to keep on calking a rickety old ship that springs a new leak every time you calk an old one—and so on, and so on, a long chapter of discussion between us without a result, he holding that the affairs of the human race are important, worth our best efforts for their improvement and our loyal belief in the proposition that the improvement can be made permanent, and I denying these things in detail and in mass. Stead has a large reverence for the human race and a strong belief in its far-reaching far-reaching far reaching intelligence and wisdom; I don’t know where he got it, but that is his affair, not mine. Stead is a strong man and a good man, and I think he is almost always in the right. Stead is not popular in England, where he belongs. This is sufficiently good evidence that both his head and his heart are right—at least I look at it in that way. President way. President way. [¶] President paragraph break deleted Roosevelt is to-day, by very long odds—overwhelming odds—the most popular being, human or divine, visible or invisible, that has ever sojourned in America. I think it is a very damaging fact, and ought to make the President distinctly uncomfortable. In view of the things which I have just been saying, the following letter has an odd interest for me. It arrived this morning from Canada, and was written three days ago. I will leave out the introductory remarks and present the meat of the letter, which is in the form of an essay. The Broader View. Calm, fearless, imperturbable, the observer of world history should stand amid the travail of events. Knowing that all forms however dear and all ideas however cherished must change, he should behold their mutations without emotion. Things were real to Alexander. Alexander. Alexander, Alexander. He had his social and political ideas and his gods. He undoubtedly looked upon them as important enough to be permanent. To us these things are little more than names. Caesar, we are taught, was a great military genius. He conquered a world. His time also possessed gods and social and political systems. His gods we call mythological, his social arrangements we could not abide for he dressed and fed and otherwise lived like a barbarian. His language we call dead. We do not even know it’s accent. Things were very real to Caesar. Napoleon, perhaps the greatest reservoir of human energy that ever existed, was here and is gone. Although so recent, historians already differ materially regarding many of the events of his career. History itself begins but a few thousand years back and in that time has shown kaliedescopic changes in every department of human affairs. It has been stated by Mark Twain, the deepest philosopher America has produced, that “The altar-cloth of one age becomes the door-mat of the next.” We, that have no scarcity of door-mats yet cling trustingly to our altar-cloths. We hope against all experience that our’s shall be the ones to cohere. Does any really acute thinker believe that they shall? In it’s self-consciousness the present may be personified as a stupendous egotist as blind as big. It is as though at each second the clock ticked out “I am THE second, I am eternity.” The seconds grow into minutes, the minutes into hours, the hours into days, the days into years, the years into eons, the end is not yet. Down the long procession, reaching into the dim mists beyond the beginning of history, march multitudes of errors of belief and practice. Those errors were solemn facts in their respective days. Jah, Baal, Ra, Jove, Thor were names by which was called that infinite abstraction, God, source, power and director of the universe. When the conceptions of today have taken their places in the march of centuries, shall they too be considered as in the dark catalog of errors? With our lesson can we be so egotistic, so foolish, so ignorant as to believe otherwise? From the crude stone phallus and the gilded sun, through every anthromorphic modification down to the intangible abstraction of the most diaphanous deist, there has not yet been discovered one iota of knowledge, one definite idea, however minute, or one useful relation between existence and that for which man has so diligently and so blindly searched. Teachers of the people today, with an assurance that is astounding, pronounce upon the great problems of existence forgetting that almost with the last echo of their voices, they are the uncatalogued clods of a forgotten race. Ages ago men pronounced as positively what we now regard as arrant nonsense. Augurs were employed to watch the flight of birds before the departure of an army of conquest. Omens were to them realities. Later Cromwell began his battles with prayer. In our day, Chinese Gordon was deeply imbued with the idea of the personal management of the universe by a God. Was any one more absurd than the others? All of our inventions, our arts and our sciences seem powerless to teach to the multitude the evanescence of any point in history. All they have succeeded in doing has been to change the names of the fetishes as they carry them down the highway of time. Mark G. McElhinney McElhinney McElhinney [paraph] McElhimey.