14 February 1908 Dictated February February Feb. 14, 1908 The many wonderful inventions that have had their birth since Mr. Clemens was born; the newest the autochrome—Mr. Clemens’s picture is taken in Bermuda, with Margaret, by the Lumière Lumière Lumiere process. One’s first contact with a fresh, new, thrilling novelty is for him a memorable event. I still remember quite clearly the wonder and delight that swept through me the first time I ever saw a daguerreotype; and along with it was the sense that there wasn’t any reality about this miracle; that it was a dream, a product of enchantment—beautiful, astonishing, but impermanent. I still remember my first contact with the electric telegraph, and with the phonograph, and with the wireless, and with the telephone, and with the Hoe press—which with my own eyes I saw print twenty thousand newspapers on one side in an hour, and couldn’t quite believe it although I was actually seeing it. Oh, compare that wee marvel with to-day’s press! Oh . . . press! Oh . . . press! In Bermuda an addition was made to the list of these great first contacts, these splendid impossibles: it was the autochrome. I had never seen a sample of that lovely miracle before. A gentleman amateur there had half a dozen half a dozen half-a-dozen pictures, pictures, pictures, made by himself himself himself, by the Lumière Lumière Lumiere process, of Bermudian scenery, and a picture of his little girl reposing in the midst of tapestries and vases and rugs, and flowers, and other things distinguished for variety and beauty of coloring, and I was carried away with them. I was glad to have lived to see at last that old, old dream of the photographer come true—the colored photograph painted by the master, the sun. How many wonderful inventions have had their birth since I was born! Broadly speaking, it is an interminable list. I was born in the same year that the lucifer match lucifer match lucifer-match was born, and the latest link in this great chain is the dainty and bewitching Lumière Lumière Lumiere . The amateur whom I have spoken of was preparing an article about the Lumière Lumière Lumiere process for one of the great magazines, and he wanted a picture of me for use as one of the illustrations. I was quite willing to sit, but said Margaret must be put into the picture with me. The picture was notably successful. I was in white, and so was Margaret. Her frock was a very white white, and her white jacket had broad lapels of an intense red; also she wore a red leather belt. My white clothes were of three slightly differing shades of white, and in the picture those shades were exactly reproduced—the coat one shade of white, the shirt-front a slightly whiter white, the necktie a slightly whiter white than the shirt-front. The Lumière Lumière Lumiere had a sharper eye than myself; I had not detected those differences until it revealed them to me. . . . . me. . . . . me.. . . . One day One day One day Miss W. betrayed to me one of Margaret’s sweet little confidences. Margaret said to her, “Is Mr. Clemens married?” “No.” Margaret, Margaret, Margaret, after a little pause, pause, pause, said, with a dear and darling earnestness, and much as if she were soliloquizing aloud, “If I were his wife I would never leave his side for a moment; I would stay by him and watch him, and take care of him all the time.” It was the mother instinct speaking from the child of twelve; it took no note of the disparity of age; it took no note of my seventy-two years; it noticed only that I was careless, and it was affectionately prepared to protect me from my defect. I have already spoken at some length of a couple of other gems of my collection: Francesca and Dorothy—my New Jersey Dorothy, Dorothy Quick. I have two other Dorothies besides—an an another American one and an English one. The collection of gems continued—Dorothy Quick—Her April Fools’ Day anecdote, and Colonel Colonel Col. Harvey’s story of Naughty Mabel at the races—Dorothy’s methods of playing games. Dorothy Quick is eleven and a half years old now, and as tirelessly active, vivacious, energetic, bright, interesting, good, obedient, obedient, obedient,— and sweet sweet also as sweet and companionable and charming charming charming— as ever. When we were shipmates shipmates ship-mates last summer, coming home from England, I discovered her the second day out, and took possession, leaving her mother, her grandfather grandfather grandfather, and her grandmother grandmother grandmother, to get along the best they could without her during the most of each day, for we were nearly inseparable. When the time for that ancient function, the “concert,” approached—a paid show in aid of the sailor hospitals of England and America—the elected manager came to me and asked if I would take part in the performance and make a speech. I said, with asperity, “It is strange that you should come to me me me ‘me’ underscored with such an errand. I am a slave; I have no authority in the matter. Go to the source of power—go to the master. I will perform if the master permits.” “If I may ask, who is the master?” “Dorothy.” The manager hunted Dorothy up and gravely laid the proposition before her, and was as gravely answered. The result appeared in the printed program, an hour later—thus: “Mark Twain, speech. (By permission of Dorothy Quick)” One day last September when Dorothy spent a week with us in Tuxedo, she sat at luncheon looking radiantly sweet and lovely in her bright summer costume, and I said, “Dorothy, I am holding in—I am holding in all I can—but I don’t think I can hold in much longer—I want to eat you! you! you.! period mended to an exclamation point ” She responded promptly, “Don’t do it, Mr. Clemens, I should miss you so.” We fell to telling anecdotes, and Dorothy furnished one or two. One of hers was to this effect: It was April Fools’ Day, and little Johnny burst into the parlor, parlor, parlor, where a dozen ladies were taking a cup of five o’clock tea, and exclaimed excitedly, “Mamma, there’s a stranger up stairs up stairs up-stairs kissing the governess! governess! governess.! period mended to an exclamation point ” Mamma started indignantly toward the stairs, stairs, stairs, with battle in her eye, then then and then Johnny cried out in triumphant delight, “April fool! It ain’t a stranger at all—it’s only papa! papa! papa.! period mended to an exclamation point ” Next day Colonel Colonel Col. Harvey came down to spend the day. That charming man, that gifted man, has a certain peculiarity: peculiarity: peculiarity;: semicolon mended to a colon sometimes a humorous thing carries him off his feet; at another time the same thing would merely set him to thinking, and there would be no indication that he had even heard it. We were used to this peculiarity, but it was new to Dorothy. The Colonel was in a happy mood, and he told several anecdotes. One of them was to this effect, an incident which had fallen under his personal observation: Scene, the grand stand; occasion, a great horse-race horse-race horse-race ; present, in their rich attire, ladies of high society; a little apart, a pretty creature, unattended, overdressed; overdressed; over-dressed,; comma mended to a semicolon under-bred, also, also, also, by the look of her. She was painstakingly painstakingly pains-takingly looking the lady of culture and high degree, and she quite successfully kept up the calm dignity proper to the part until the flying horses began to draw near; then she forgot herself and began to get excited. Her excitement grew, and she further forgot herself and stood up—which made those other ladies transfer their attention from the race to her, though she was unaware of it. She craned her neck; her eager eyes began to flame with excitement; next she began, unconsciously, to soliloquize aloud. She uttered her thought in gasps: “I’m I’m I’m am going to win!——I’m going to win sure! . . . . . . Go on—whip up—whip up! . . . . . . . he’s half a nose ahead! . . . . . . . . he’s he’s Hhe’s three-quarters of a nose ahead! . . . . . . . . . . Oh he’s dropping back! back, and back, and back! . . . . . . . . . Damn his soul he’s lost the race!” the race!” !” the race!” Then she turned on a Vesuvian irruption irruption eirruption of profanities and indelicacies that turned the air blue, and made those staring ladies gasp! gasp! gasp.! period mended to an exclamation point There was a pause, then the soliloquizer came to herself, took one pathetic glance—one self-reproachful glance—at those horrified people, and ejaculated, “Naughty Mabel!” We thought it was about time to show off our Dorothy, so I asked her to tell us the April Fool story. She told it in her dearest and sweetest and most winningly simple and matter-of-fact fashion—and there was no result; that is, is, is, from the Colonel. His reflecting-mill was at work; he probably had not heard Dorothy’s effort. The child looked mortified, but didn’t say anything. The cut was deep—as appeared after a long, long interval; an interval of twenty-four whole hours, during which Dorothy had not mentioned the episode—but that it had been rankling all that time was evidenced in the fact that now at last when she came to comment upon it there was no subject at all before the house, yet she dropped her comment right into the midst of that vacancy without any word of introduction, and didn’t even couple the Colonel’s name with it, but said “he”— “He laughs at his own jokes, but he doesn’t care for other people’s.” Dorothy came last Saturday and stayed stayed staid over Sunday, and she was her same old dear self all the time. We occupied the billiard room billiard room billiard-room all day; again Dorothy read Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakespeare aloud, always selecting from each play her favorite passages and skipping the rest of it—which is her fashion. Now and then, between billiard games, she browsed among the books, making selection after selection, and always good selections; she would read aloud about twenty minutes, then require me to read aloud for about twenty; then she would inaugurate a game of “500” “500” “500” and discard it in twenty minutes; next she would play euchre twenty minutes; next it would be a game of verbarium, and so on all the day long—twenty minutes to each fleeting interest, with twenty minutes of billiards sandwiched between every two of them. And all the day long, from nine in the morning till her bedtime—nine at night—she was an immeasurable delight. If you don’t know what verbarium is I will explain. You write a great long word at the top of a sheet of paper; then you begin with the first letter of that word and build words out of the letters of the long word with that letter as a beginner; and the contestant who builds the most words in a given length of time is the winner. Then you take the second letter, and continue the process. Dorothy would laboriously harvest six or seven words; then she would discover that the text-word needed another vowel or another consonant to make it really effective, and she would suggest that we add the letter which she needed. I never objected; I always said it would be a fortunate addition—and as I never smiled, I never fell under suspicion. But there was opportunity to smile, for usually by the time Dorothy was tired of the game the text-word which originally contained only seventeen letters, had, in the course of the game, accumulated the rest of the alphabet. She’s a darling little billiard player; and when she plays the game the game it the game you can recognize that it is Dorothy, and not another, because under her sway all rules fail fail fail— and new ones are introduced— introduced— introduced,— on her sole and sufficient authority and without any vote— vote— vote,— which improve that game beyond imagination. When the balls do not lie favorably she makes no remark, but groups them in a better position and goes on with her performance without any comments. Dorothy Quick, continued—copy of letter recently received from her. A letter has come from Dorothy, and I will insert it here to show how much she hasn’t improved in punctuation and in slowing her swift pen down, and in curbing and taming her dear headlong eagerness. My My Feb 18th 1908 monogram: D.G.Q. My My Dear Mr Clemens Thank you so much for your lovely valentine I had thirty-one when yours came so now I have thirty-two and they were all lovely every one has admired my belt that you brought me from Bermuda very much it is really beautiful I read in the paper all about Miss Clara’s musical it must have been lovely I love Miss Clara she is so beautiful Will you write me soon I always rush for the mails they are delivered here three times a day always hoping I will get a letter from you but I know you are busy and cant write so often I suppose you went out out out out out for a walk today it was so lovely out here today I went to a party yesterday had a lovely played lots of silly games but it was great fun I didn’t get one prize what do you think of that lots and lots of love and kisses your loving Dorothy P.S. Please give my love to Miss Lyon Her letter exposes another small defect or two, but they are like all her defects—for they go to make up Dorothy, and anything that goes to the making up of Dorothy is precious, and cannot be discarded without loss. What would a letter from Dorothy be if its express-train pace were obstructed and retarded at every milestone milestone mile-stone by commas, and semicolons, and periods; and if it didn’t revel in tautologies; and if the rushing floods from the child’s golden heart were tamed by cold literary calculation and made to flow in an orderly stream between the banks and never overflow them? I couldn’t have it, it wouldn’t be Dorothy. Dorothy is perfect, just as she is; Dorothy the child cannot be improved; let Dorothy the woman wait till the proper time comes. Last summer I thoughtlessly gave Dorothy an instructive hint, and afterwards mourned about it; but the mourning was premature—the hint went wide of the mark and produced no result, achieved no damage. That hint was to this effect: I told her there was a wide difference between repetition and tautology; that she must never be afraid to repeat a word where the repetition could help to uncloud her meaning and make it clear, bright, distinct, and unmistakable, but that she must be cautious about repeating a word when it would not have that effect, for then the repetition would be tautological, and, by consequence, commonplace and slovenly in the result. This letter is evidence to me, with its prodigal repetitions of “love” and “lovely,” that even to this happy day the difference between helpful repetition and tautology has no existence for Dorothy.