[Robert Louis Stevenson and Thomas Bailey Aldrich] [Robert Louis Stevenson and Thomas Bailey Aldrich] title [Robert Louis Stevenson and Thomas Bailey Aldrich] not in But ¶ But ¶ But ¶ . . . . But IV. ¶ . . . But it was on a bench in Washington Square that I saw the most of Louis Stevenson. It was an outing that lasted an hour or more more more more, and was very pleasant and sociable. I had come with him from his house, house, house house, house, where I had been paying my respects to his family. His business in the Square was to absorb the sunshine. He was most scantily furnished with flesh, his clothes seemed to fall into hollows as if there might be nothing inside but the frame for a sculptor’s statue. His long face and lank hair and dark complexion and musing and melancholy expression seemed to fit these details justly and harmoniously, and the altogether of it seemed especially planned to gather the rays rays rags ragys rays of your observation and focalize them upon Stevenson’s special distinction and commanding feature, his splendid eyes. They burned with a smouldering rich fire under the pent-house pent-house pent-house penthouse of his brows, and they made him beautiful. * * * * * * * * * row of nine ellipsis points, in groups of three xxxxxxxxxx deleted, then restored with the instruction ‘STET’ row of eight ellipsis points I ¶ I ¶ . . . I ¶ I said I thought he was right about the others, but mistaken as to Bret Harte; in substance I said that Harte was good company and a thin but pleasant talker; that he was always bright, but never brilliant; that in this matter he must not be classed with Thomas Bailey Aldrich, nor must any other man, ancient or modern; that Aldrich was always witty, always brilliant, if there was anybody present capable of striking his flint at the right angle; that Aldrich was as sure and prompt and unfailing as the red hot red hot red hot red-hot iron on the blacksmith’s anvil—you you You you had only to hit it competently to make it deliver an explosion of sparks. I added— “Aldrich has never had his peer for prompt and pithy and witty and humorous sayings. None has equaled equaled equaled equalled him, certainly none has surpassed him, in the felicity of phrasing with which he clothed these children of his fancy. Aldrich was always brilliant, he couldn’t help it, he is a fire-opal set round with rose diamonds; when he is not speaking, speaking, speaking speaking, speaking, you know that his dainty fancies are twinkling and glimmering around in him; when he speaks the diamonds flash. Yes, he was always brilliant, he will always be brilliant; he will be brilliant in hell—you will see.” Stevenson, smiling a chuckly smile, “I hope not.” “Well, you will, and he will dim even those ruddy fires and look like a transfigured Adonis transfigured Adonis blonde Venus blonde Venus transfigured Adonis transfigured Adonis backed against a pink sunset.” * * * * * * * * * row of nine ellipsis points, in groups of three xxxxxxxxxxx row of eight ellipsis points There on that bench we struck out a new phrase—one one one, one or the other of us, I don’t remember which—“submerged renown.” Variations were discussed: discussed: discussed: discussed: inserted colon corrects an illegible character “submerged fame,” “submerged fame,” submerged fame, “submerged fame,” “submerged fame,” “submerged reputation,” “submerged reputation,” submerged reputation, “submerged reputation,” “submerged reputation,” and so on, and a choice was made; “submerged renown” “submerged renown” submerged renown “submerged renown” “submerged renown” was elected, I believe. This important matter rose out of an incident which had been happening to Stevenson in Albany. While in a book shop or book stall book shop or book stall book shop or book stall book-shop or book-stall there he had noticed a long rank of small books books books books, cheaply but neatly gotten up, and bearing such titles as “Davis’s Selected Speeches,” “Davis’s Selected Poetry,” Davis’s this and Davis’s that and Davis’s the other thing; compilations, compilations, compilations compilations, compilations, every one of them, each with a brief, compact, intelligent and useful introductory chapter by this same Davis, whose first name I have forgotten. Stevenson had begun the matter with this question: “Can you name the American author whose fame and acceptance stretch widest widest widest and furthest widest and furthest widest in the States?” I thought I could, but it did not seem to me that it would be modest to speak out, in the circumstances. So I diffidently said nothing. Stevenson noticed, and said— “Save your delicacy for another time—you you You Yyou you are not the one. For a shilling you can’t name the American author of widest note and popularity in the States States States States . But I can.” Then he went on and told about that Albany incident. He had inquired of the shopman— “Who ¶ “Who no ¶ “Who ¶ “Who is this Davis?” The answer was— “An author whose books have to have freight trains to carry them, not baskets. Apparently you have not heard of him?” Stevenson said no, this was the first time. The man said— “Nobody has heard of Davis; you may ask all around all around all-round all around and you will see. You never see his name mentioned in print, not even in advertisements advertisements advertisements advertisement ; these things are of no use to Davis, not any more than they are to the wind and the sea. You never see one of Davis’s books floating on top of the United States, but put on your diving armor and get yourself lowered away down and down and down till you strike the dense region, the sunless region of eternal drudgery and starvation wages—there you’ll you’ll you will you’ll find them by the million. The man that gets that market, his fortune is made, his bread and butter are safe, for those people will never go back on him. An author may have a reputation which is confined to the surface, and lose it and become pitied, then despised, then forgotten, entirely forgotten—the frequent steps in a surface reputation. A surface reputation, however great, is always mortal, and always killable if you go at it right—with with With with pins and needles, and quiet slow poison, not with the club and the tomahawk the tomahawk the tomahawk tomahawk . But it is a different matter with the submerged reputation—down in the deep water; once a favorite there, always a favorite; once beloved, always beloved; once respected, always respected, honored, and believed in. For, what the reviewer says never finds its way down into those placid deeps; nor the newspaper sneers, nor any breath of the winds of slander blowing above. Down there they never hear of these things. Their idol may be painted clay, up there at the surface, and fade and waste and crumble and blow away, there being much weather there; but down below he is gold and adamant and indestructible.” indestructible.” indestructible. indestructible.”