13 June 1906 Wednesday, June 13, 1906 The days of reporting on the Morning Call Morning Call Morning Call —The advent of Smiggy McGlural and the resignation of Mr. Clemens—Destruction of Morning Call Morning Call Morning Call building in recent earthquake—Good times with Bret Harte in Morning Call Morning Call Morning Call office. How wonderful are the ways of Providence! But I will take that up later. In those days—about In those days—about In those days—about About forty years ago— ago— ago— ago I was a reporter on the Morning Call of San Francisco. I was more than that—I was the reporter. There was no other. There was enough work for one, and a little over, but not enough for two—according to Mr. Barnes’s idea, and he was the proprietor, and therefore better situated to know about it than other people. By nine in the morning I had to be at the at the at the at police court for an hour and make a brief history of the squabbles of the night before. They were usually between Irishmen and Irishmen, Irishmen, Irishmen, Irishmen, and Chinamen and Chinamen, with now and then a squabble between the two races, for a change. Each day’s evidence was substantially a duplicate of the evidence of the day before, therefore the daily performance was killingly monotonous and wearisome. So far as I could see, there was only one man connected with it who found anything like a compensating interest in it, and that was the court interpreter. He was an Englishman who was glibly familiar with fifty-six Chinese dialects. He had to change from one to another of them every ten minutes, and this exercise was so energizing that it kept him always awake—which was not the case with the reporters. Next, we visited the higher courts, courts, courts, courts, and made notes of the decisions which had been rendered the day before. day before. previous day. before. day before. All the courts came under the head of “regulars.” They were sources of reportorial information which never failed. During the rest of the day we raked the town from end to end, gathering such material as we might, might, might, might, wherewith to fill our required column—and if there were no fires to report, report, report, report, we started some. At night we visited the six theatres theatres theaters , one after the other: seven other: seven other:. Sseven period mended to a colon; ‘S’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ other, seven nights in the week, three hundred and sixty-five nights in the year. We year. We year. , wWe ‘w’ underscored three times to capitalize year. We remained in each of those places five minutes, got the merest passing glimpse of play and opera, and with that for a text we “wrote up” those plays and operas, as the phrase goes, torturing our souls every night, from the beginning of the year to the end of it, in the effort to find something to say about those performances which we had not said a couple of hundred times before. There has never been a time, from that day to this (forty years), this (forty years), this, (forty years), this (forty years), that I have been able to look at even the outside of a theatre theatre theater without a spasm of the dry gripes, as “Uncle Remus” calls it—and as for the inside, I know next to nothing about that, for in all this time I have seldom had a sight of it, nor ever had a desire in that regard which couldn’t have been overcome by argument. After having been hard at work from nine or ten in the morning until eleven at night scraping material together, I took the pen and spread this muck muck muck much out in words and phrases, phrases, phrases, phrases, and made it cover as much acreage as I could. It was fearful drudgery—soulless drudgery—and almost destitute of interest. It was an awful slavery for a lazy man, and I was born lazy. I am no lazier now than I was forty years ago, but that is because I reached the limit forty years ago. You can’t go beyond possibility. Finally there was an event. One Sunday afternoon I saw some hoodlums chasing and stoning a Chinaman who was heavily laden with the weekly wash of his Christian customers, and I noticed that a policeman was observing this performance with an amused interest—nothing more. He did not interfere. I wrote up the incident with considerable warmth and holy indignation. Usually I didn’t want to read, read, read, read, in the morning, morning, morning, morning, what I had written the night before; it before; it before;. Iit period mended to a semicolon; ‘I’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ before; it had come from a torpid heart. But this item had come from a live one. There was fire in it, and I believed it was literature—and so I sought for it in the paper next morning with eagerness. It wasn’t there. It wasn’t there the next morning, nor the next. I went up to the composing-room composing-room composing-room composing room and found it tucked away among condemned matter on the standing galley. I asked about it. The foreman said Mr. Barnes had found it in a galley-proof galley-proof galley-proof galley proof and ordered its extinction. And Mr. Barnes furnished his reasons—either to me or to the foreman, I don’t remember which; but they were commercially sound. He said that the Call was like the New York Sun of that day: it was the washerwoman’s paper—that is, it was like the New York Sun of that day: it was the washerwoman’s paper—that is, it was . . . day:. Iit . . . washer-woman’s paper—that is, it period mended to a colon; ‘I’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ not in was the paper of the poor; it was the only cheap cheap penny cheap cheap paper. It gathered its livelihood from the poor, poor, poor, poor, and must respect their prejudices, prejudices, prejudices, prejudices, or perish. The Irish were the poor. They were the stay and support of the Morning Call; without them the Morning Call could not survive a month—and they hated the Chinamen. Such an assault as I had attempted attempted made attempted attempted could rouse the whole Irish hive, hive, hive, hive, and seriously seriously must seriously SLC wrote an insertion caret under the deleted word and then canceled it seriously damage the paper. The Call could not afford to publish articles criticising criticising criticizing the hoodlums for stoning Chinamen. I was lofty in those days. I have survived it. I was unwise, unwise, unwise, unwise, then. I am up-to-date now. Day before yesterday’s New York Sun has a paragraph or two from its London correspondent which enables me to locate myself. The correspondent mentions a few of our American events of the past twelvemonth, such as the limitless limitless gigantic limitless limitless rottenness of our great insurance companies insurance companies Insurance Companies , where theft has been carried on by our most distinguished commercial men as a profession; the exposures of conscienceless graft—colossal graft—in great municipalities like Philadelphia, St. Louis, and other large cities; the recent exposure of million-fold million-fold millionfold graft in the great Pennsylvania Railway Railway Railway railway system—with minor uncoverings of commercial swindles from one end of the United States to the other; and finally to-day’s lurid lurid lurid lurid exposure, by Upton Sinclair, Sinclair, St. Clair, Sinclair, Sinclair of the most titanic titanic Ttitanic titanic and death-dealing swindle of them all, the Beef Trust, an exposure which has moved the President moved the President compelled the Government and moved the President—manifestly against their will— the will of the House of Repres moved the President to demand of a reluctant a reluctant a reluctant a reluctant Congress a law which shall protect America and Europe from falling, in a mass, into the hands of the doctor and the undertaker. According to that correspondent, Europe is beginning to wonder if there is really an honest male human creature left creature left being creature left SLC wrote a partial circle around ‘left’ and then canceled it creature left in the United States. A year ago, I was satisfied that there was no such person existing upon American soil—except myself. That exception has since been rubbed out, and now it is my belief that there isn’t a single male human being in America who is honest. I held the belt all along along along alone , until last January. Then I went down, with Rockefeller and Carnegie and a group of Goulds and Vanderbilts and other professional grafters, professional grafters, professional grafters, of minor importance, professional grafters and swore off my taxes like the most conscienceless of the lot. I was a great loss to America, because I was irreplaceable. It is my belief that it will will would will will take fifty years to produce my successor. I believe the entire population of the United States—exclusive of the women—to be rotten, as far as the dollar is concerned. Understand, I am saying these things as a dead person. I should consider it indiscreet in any live one to make these remarks publicly. But, as I was saying, I was loftier forty years ago than I am now, and I felt a deep shame in being situated as I was—slave of such a journal as the Morning Call. If I had been still loftier I would have thrown up my berth and gone out and starved, like any other hero. But I had never had any experience. I had dreamed heroism, like everybody, but I had had no practice, and I didn’t know how to begin. I couldn’t bear to begin with starving. I had already come near to that once or twice in my life, life, life, life, and got no real enjoyment out of remembering about it. I knew I couldn’t get another berth if I resigned. I knew it perfectly well. Therefore I swallowed my humiliation and stayed where I was. But But But But, whereas there had been little enough interest attaching to my industries, before, industries, before, industries, before, industries before, there was none at all now. I continued my work, but I took not the least interest in it, and naturally there were results. I got to neglecting it. As I have said, there was too much of it for one man. The way I was conducting it now, there was apparently work enough in it for two or three. Even Barnes noticed that, and told me to get an assistant, on half wages. There was a great hulking creature down in the counting-room counting-room counting-room counting room —good-natured, obliging, unintellectual—and he was getting little or nothing a week and boarding himself. A graceless boy of the counting-room force who had no reverence for anybody or anything, was always making fun of this beachcomber beachcomber beachcomber ‘beach comber’ marked to close up beach-comber , and he had a name for him which somehow seemed intensely apt and descriptive—I don’t know why. He called him Smiggy McGlural. I offered the berth of assistant to Smiggy, Smiggy, Smiggy, Smiggy, and he accepted it with alacrity and gratitude. He went at his work with ten times the energy that was left in me. He was not intellectual, but mentality was not required or needed in a Morning Callreporter, and so he conducted his office to perfection. I gradually got to leaving more and more of the work to McGlural. I grew lazier and lazier, and within thirty days he was doing almost the whole of it. It was also plain that he could accomplish the whole of it, and more, all by himself, and therefore had no real need of me. It was at this crucial moment that that event happened which I mentioned a while a while a while awhile ago. Mr. Barnes discharged me. It was the only time in my life that I have ever been discharged, and it hurts yet—although I am in my grave. It was . . . discharged, . . . my grave. It was . . . discharged, . . . in my grave. not in He did not discharge me rudely. It was not in his nature to do that. He was a large, handsome man, with a kindly face and courteous ways, and was faultless in his dress. He could not have said a rude, ungentle thing to anybody. He took me privately aside and advised me to resign. It was like a father advising a son for his good, and I obeyed. I was on the world, now, now, now, now, with nowhere to go. By my Presbyterian training, training, training, training I knew that the Morning Call had brought disaster upon itself. I knew the ways of Providence, and I knew that this offence offence offense would have to be answered for. I could not foresee when the penalty would fall nor what shape it would take, but I was as certain that it would come, sooner or later, as I was of my own existence. I could not tell whether it would fall upon Barnes or upon his newspaper. But Barnes was the guilty one, and I knew, by my training, that the punishment always falls upon the innocent one, consequently I felt sure that it was the newspaper that at some future day would suffer for Barnes’s crime. Sure enough! Among the very first pictures that arrived, in the fourth week of April—there stood the Morning Call building towering out of the wrecked city, like a Washington Monument Monument monument Monument ; and the body of it was all gone, and nothing was left but the iron bones! bones! bones.! period mended to an exclamation point bones! It was then that I said said said said, “How wonderful are the ways of Providence!” I had known it would happen. I had known it for forty years. I had never lost my confidence confidence confidence trust confidence in Providence during all that time. It was put off longer than I was expecting, but it was now comprehensive and satisfactory enough to make up for that. Some people would think it curious that Providence should destroy an entire city of four hundred thousand inhabitants to settle an account of forty years’ standing, between a mere discharged reporter and a newspaper, but to me there was nothing strange about that, because I was educated, I was trained, I was a Presbyterian, and I knew how these things are done. I knew that in Biblical times, if a man committed a sin, the extermination of the whole surrounding nation—cattle and all—was likely to happen. I knew that Providence was not particular about the rest, so that He got somebody connected with the one He was after. I remembered that in the Magnalia a man who went home swearing, from prayer-meeting one night, got his reminder within the next nine months. He had a wife and seven children, and all at once they were attacked by a terrible disease, and one by one they died in agony, till at the end of a week there was nothing left but the man himself. I knew that the idea was to punish the man, and I knew that if he had any intelligence he recognized that that intention had been carried out, although mainly at the expense of other people. Some . . . account . . . years’ . . . sin, . . . swearing, . . . children, . . . out, although mainly at the expense of other people. Some . . . account, . . . years’ . . . sin, . . . swearing, . . . children, . . . out., although mainly at the expense of other people. not in In those ancient times the counting-room of the Morning Call was on the ground floor; the office of the Superintendent Superintendent Superintendent superindentent of the United States Mint was on the next floor above, with Bret Harte as private secretary of the Superintendent Superintendent Superintendent superintendent . The quarters of the editorial staff and the reporter were on the third floor, and the composing-room composing-room composing-room composing room on the fourth and final floor. I spent a good deal of time with Bret Harte in his office after Smiggy McGlural came, but not before that. Harte was doing a good deal of writing for The The the Californian—contributing “Condensed Novels” “Condensed Novels” “cCondensed nNovels” “Condensed Novels” and sketches to it, and also acting as editor, I think. I was a contributor. So was Charles H. Webb; Webb; Webb; Webb, also Prentice Mulford; Prentice Mulford; appPrenticess Mulford; Prentiss Mulford, also a young lawyer named Hastings, who gave promise of distinguishing himself in literature some day. Charles Warren Stoddard was a contributor. Ambrose Bierce, who is still writing acceptably for the magazines to-day, was then employed on some paper in San Francisco—The Golden The Golden The Current Golden Paine made the correction to ‘Golden’ in pencil; SLC confirmed it by underscoring the word the Golden Era, perhaps. We had very good times together—very social and pleasant times. But that was after Smiggy McGlural came to my assistance; there assistance; there assistance;. Tthere period mended to a semicolon assistance; there was no leisure before that. Smiggy was a great advantage to me—during thirty days. Then he turned into a disaster. It was Mr. Swain, Superintendent Swain, Superintendent Swain, Superintendent Swain, superintendent of the Mint, who discovered Bret Harte. Harte had arrived in California in the ’50s ’50s fifties ’fifties , twenty-three or twenty-four years old, and had wandered up into the surface diggings of the camp at Yreka, a place which had acquired its curious name— name— name— name when in its first days it much needed a name—through an accident. There was a bakeshop bakeshop bakeshop bake shop with a canvas sign which had not yet been put up but had been painted and stretched to dry in such a way that the word bakery bakery bakery bakery, all but the B, showed through and was reversed. A stranger read it wrong end first, Yreka, and supposed that that was the name of the camp. The campers were satisfied with it and adopted it. Harte taught taught kept taught taught school in that camp several months. He also edited the weekly rag which was doing duty as a newspaper. He spent a little time also in the pocket-mining pocket-mining pocket-mining pocket mining camp of Jackass Gulch (where (where (where (where I tarried, some years later, during three months). months). months.) months.) It was at Yreka and Jackass Gulch that Harte learned to accurately observe and put with photographic exactness on paper the woodland scenery of California and the general country aspects—the stage-coach stage-coach stagecoach , its driver and its passengers, and the clothing and general style of the surface-miner surface-miner surface miner , the gambler, and their women; and it was also in these places that he learned, without the trouble of observing, all that he didn’t know about mining, and how to make it read as if an expert were behind the pen. It was in those places that he also learned how to fascinate Europe and America with the quaint dialect of the miner—a dialect which no man in heaven or earth had ever used until Harte invented it. it. it. followed by a caret with no insertion; caret canceled in pencil, possibly by Paine it. With Harte it died, but it was no loss. loss. loss. followed by a caret with no insertion; caret canceled in pencil, possibly by Paine loss. By and by he came to San Francisco. He was a compositor, compositor, compositor, compositor by trade, and got work in the Golden the Golden The Current Golden the Golden Era office at ten dollars a week.