2 November 1908 Dictated November 2 2 2nd , 1908 Several times in this Autobiography I have spoken of an unpublished philosophy of mine entitled “What “What What is Man?” Man?” Man? About three years ago I copyrighted the book in Mr. Mr. Mr Bosworth’s name and got a few copies printed and bound— bound— bound— typed hyphen retraced to make a dash four hundred. F. N. Doubleday attended to it for me. Bosworth is superintendent of a great printing-house printing-house Printing house in New York. He transferred the copyright to Doubleday, Doubleday, Doubleday, and Doubleday transferred it to me. In this way the authorship has been kept secret. I have disclosed the authorship to half a dozen half a dozen half-a-dozen special friends, safe people and trustworthy. Doubleday has possessed my secret ten or eleven years; I read a part of the manuscript to him in Vienna in ’97 or ’98. My idea in privately printing the four hundred copies was, to distribute them among thinking men, concealing concealing still concealing the authorship, and in this way to get at their opinion of the book unmodified by prejudice. I felt entirely sure that no highly sane and intelligent person could read it understandingly and not accept its positions. But it turned out that I had a couple of serious difficulties to contend with. They were these: a sane man of high intelligence is sure to be a busy man, and is about equally sure to waste-basket waste-basket waste-basket a philosophy which comes to him untagged with a name commanding attention; the other was, that no man, howsoever sane and intelligent can read a new philosophy understandingly. His vision will be blurred by age-long preconceptions due to training and environment, and until somebody shall brush these away he will misinterpret the book, and misunderstand it. Doubleday sent a copy to Kipling’s father, a very intelligent man, and his verdict was very amusing; amusing; amusing,; comma mended to a semicolon also also also quite necessarily and quite naturally grotesque. For the book had not been explained to him; him; him.; period mended to a semicolon wherefore wherefore And wherefore he saw it through spectacles falsely focussed by ancient and foolish preconceptions and superstitions. With Andrew Carnegie the result was the same. The same with Bernard Shaw’s biographer, who wildly imagined a lot of resemblances between Shaw’s philosophy and mine. It eventually became eventually became was eventually became plain to me that to get intelligent verdicts from sane and intelligent men who had not been taught how to read the book, was an impossibility and I gave it up. But I found that whenever I read the small book myself to a person of good intelligence, intelligence, intelligence, of whatsoever age or sex, I always captured a disciple. Generally against the disciple’s will, still the disciple was made, made, made, and and and ů and remained my possession. Remained my possession, and presently became reconciled; later, had the wit to realize that I had set him free, and was properly glad and grateful for this service I had rendered him. Ashcroft is a disciple. Some time ago he converted a Canadian friend of his, and that friend has been privately passing the book from hand to hand, and teaching people how to read it, with the result that he has added several converts to the list. He knows the authorship himself but conceals it from his clients. Mr. Norris is on the right track. By his missionary methods he has accomplished in a few months in a few months in a few months about as much in the matter of acquiring disciples disciples disciples in a few months as I have accomplished in ten years. My gospel will get a good start yet. That is all it needs, then it will thrive and spread. I shall not live to see it, but that is no matter. The following letters reached me this morning from Mr. Norris. Toronto Toronto CHARLES G. NORRIS | 202 st. clarens ave. | toronto, canada | Toronto revised in pencil Toronto, October, 30th, 1908. Dear Mr. Clemens:— I enclose herewith carbon copy of letter today to David Grayson, which explains itself. You may know him as the author of the delightful articles appearing from time to time in “The American” Magazine, for 1907–8, under heading heading headings revised in pencil heading of “Adventures in Contentment” and “The Open Road,” which indicate him a man of rare insight. I have had made four typewritten copies of “What is Man” and expect to keep these and the original constantly in circulation. They are all out now. They are all out now. They are all out now. not in It occurs to me you might have a copy available that you would want to loan Mr. Grayson. If so Mr. Ashcroft could mail it to him as indicated, care of The American Magazine. In one way I I I revised in pencil I would like him to read my copy, because of my great regard for the spirit he expresses, but am more interested in obtaining results with the book, than in a matter of sentiment. I could then request him to return the book to Mr. Ashcroft. If, however, it coincides with your wishes better, not to do this, my copy cannot be doing better service. Elbert Hubbard also writes me that he wants to see this book; that he will be in Toronto early in December, when I will hand it to him. I did not mention the title of the book in writing, yet I note a title of one of Hubbard’s lectures, curiously, is “What is Man.” Frankly, Mr. Hubbard’s personality in some ways is not very pleasing to me. He seems too pronounced an egotist; but I I I revised in pencil I cannot help admiring his candid plea of guilty; and no one can gainsay his independence and power. I have also written, among others, Edward Carpenter, the English philosopher, whom you may know as the author of “Towards Democracy” (paterned (paterned (paterned revised in pencil (paterned after “Leaves of Grass,”) Grass,”) Grass”,) revised in pencil Grass”,) and other books, and Count Leo Tolstoy. I thought perhaps you might wish to reveal yourself to Tolstoy before he reads reads reads revised in pencil reads the book. I have I have I Have revised in pencil I have hardly had time to hear from these two as yet. I believe it will not be necessary to explain that, in all this, my principle desire is service, and that every thing else with me must be subservient to one one this one this one thing; and that is, that is, that this is that this is, to “content my spirit.” The primary law of human action, as proclaimed by the book. S.L.C. spirit.”* footnote: *The primary . . . S.L.C. spirit” spirit”.* footnote: *The primary . . . S.L.C. Yours sincerely, C. G. Norris Norris Norris | Mr. S. L. Clemens, | Redding, Conn. revised in pencil Norris. Toronto Toronto Toronto revised in pencil Toronto, October, 30th, 1908. Dear David Grayson:— Your short note of the 26th, reached me yesterday. The book, which is entitled “What is Man,” had been mailed to Dr. Isaac K. Funk of New York City, who has also expressed a desire to see it, a few hours before. You probably know him as the author of that, to me, remarkable little spiritual-philosophical book “The Next Step in Evolution” and as managing editor of the “Standard Dictionary.” “Standard Dictionary.” Standard Dictionary.” Standard Dictionary. Will request him to forward it to your publishers as soon as finished unless a New York friend of mine can spare his copy immediately. Presenting the naked truth as the author has done, unadorned, not even with the garments of religion, how can the reader with any degree of spiritual intelligence fail to see the point? I realize there is but one Spirit, one Power, one Life. I know it is not I that doeth anything, but this Spirit, this Master mentioned in the book, that worketh in me, whether I will or no. I know that, while my consciousness may choose or decide which is best (expressing free-choice as the author indicates), something in me, that is not I, doeth as It wills, not as I will. I believe the time is rapidly approaching when the will of this Master will be mine, if it is not so already. Nothing, I find, contents my spirit—really satisfies me—except to do This Will. Moreover, I know that even then there is and could be only one motive for anything I do—to please myself. If convenient, shall be glad if you can get at the book immediately as I may have another request for it and shall wish to respond as soon as you have examined it to your satisfaction. Needless to say I shall receive your your your your verdict with very very every every great interest; and, if favorable, I shall want permission to forward it to the author. Sincerely yours, C. G. Norris C. G. Norris C. G. Norris [paraph] Mr. David Grayson, c/o Mr. John S. Phillips, Publisher, The American Magazine, 341 Fifth Ave., New York, revised in pencil C. G. Norris.