1 February 1906 Thursday, February title February Feb. 1, 1906 Subject of January January Jan. 24th continued—Mr. Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s unpopular vote. Joe was not quite present. It was not etiquette for him to be within hearing of the business-talks business-talks business-talks business-talks concerning the church’s affairs. He remained in the seclusion of the church parlor, ready to be consulted if that should be necessary. The congregation was present in full force; every seat was occupied. The moment the house was called to order, a member sprang to his feet and moved that the connection between Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell and the church be dissolved. The motion was promptly seconded. Here, Here, Here, Here, and there, and yonder, all over the house, there were calls of “Question! Question!” But Mr. Hubbard, a middle-aged middle-aged middle-aged middle-aged man, a wise and calm and collected man, business manager and part owner of the Courant, rose in his place and proposed to discuss the motion before rushing it to a vote. The substance of his remarks was this,—(which I must put in my own language, of course, as I was not there). “Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell was the first pastor you have ever had. You have never wanted another until two months ago. You have had no fault to find with his ministrations as your pastor, but he has suddenly become unfit to continue them because he is unorthodox in his politics, according to your views. Very well, he was was was ‘was’ underscored was fit; he has become unfit. He was was was ‘was’ underscored was valuable; his value has passed away, apparently—but only apparently. His highest value remains—if I know this congregation. When he assumed this pastorate this region was an outlying district, thinly inhabited, its real estate worth next to nothing. Mr. Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s personality was a magnet which immediately began to draw population in this direction. It has continued to draw it from that day to this. As a result, your real estate, almost valueless in the beginning, ranges now at very high prices. Reflect, before you vote upon this resolution. The church in West Hartford is waiting upon this vote with deep solicitude. That congregation’s real estate stands at a low figure. What they are anxious to have now above everything else, under God, under God, under God, under God, is a price-raiser price-raiser price-raiser price-raiser . Dismiss Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell to-night, and they will hire him to-morrow. Prices there will go up; prices here will go down. That is all. I move the vote.” Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell was not dismissed. That was twenty-two years ago. It was Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s first pulpit after his consecration to his vocation. He occupies it yet, and has never had another. The fortieth anniversary of his accession to it was celebrated by that congregation and its descendants a couple of weeks ago, and there was great enthusiasm. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell has never made any political mistakes since. His persistency in voting right has been an exasperation to me these many years, and has been the cause and inspiration of more than one vicious letter from me to him. But the viciousness was all a pretense. I have never found any real fault with him for voting his infernal Republican ticket, for the reason that situated as he was, with a large family to support, his first duty was not to his political conscience but to his family conscience. A sacrifice had to be made; a duty had to be performed. His very first duty was to his family, not to his political conscience. He sacrificed his political independence, independence, independence, independence, and saved his family by it. In the circumstances, this was the highest loyalty, and the best. If he had been a Henry Ward Beecher it would not have been his privilege to sacrifice his political conscience, because in case of dismissal a thousand pulpits would have been open to him, and his family’s bread secure. In Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s case, there would have been some risk—in fact, a good deal of risk. That he, or any other expert, could have raised the prices of real estate in West Hartford is, to my mind, exceedingly doubtful. I think Mr. Hubbard worked his imagination to the straining point when he got up that scare that night. I believe it was safest for Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell to remain where he was if he could. He saved his family, and that was his first duty, in my opinion. In this country there are perhaps eighty thousand preachers. Not more than twenty of them are politically independent—the rest cannot be politically independent. They must vote the ticket of their congregations. They do it, and are justified. They themselves are mainly the reason why they have no political independence, for they do not preach political independence from their pulpits. They have their large share in the fact that the people of this nation have no political independence. February February Feb. 1, 1906. To-morrow will be the thirty-sixth anniversary of our marriage. My wife passed from this life one year and eight months ago, in Florence, Italy, after an unbroken illness of twenty-two months’ duration. I saw her first in the form of an ivory miniature in her brother Charley’s Charley’s Charliey’s Charley’s stateroom in the steamer Quaker City Quaker City “Quaker City” Quaker City, “Quaker City,” in the Bay of Smyrna, 1867 1867 (1867) typed in the margin, deleted by Harvey (1867) typed in the margin not in in the summer of 1867, when she was in her twenty-second year. I saw her in the flesh for the first time in New York in the following December. She was slender and beautiful and girlish—and she was both girl and woman. She remained both girl and woman to the last day of her life. Under a grave and gentle exterior burned inextinguishable inextinguishable indestructible inextinguishable inextinguishable fires of sympathy, energy, devotion, enthusiasm, and absolutely limitless affection. She was always frail in body, and she lived upon her spirit, whose hopefulness and courage were indestructible. indestructible. indestructible. indestructible. indestructible. Perfect truth, perfect honesty, perfect candor, were qualities of her character which were born with her. Her judgments of people and things were sure and accurate. Her intuitions almost never deceived her. In her judgments of the characters and acts of both friends and strangers, there was always room for charity, and this charity never failed. I have compared and contrasted her with hundreds of persons, and my conviction remains that hers was the most perfect character I have ever met. And I may add that she was the most winningly dignified person I have ever known. Her character and disposition were of the sort that not only invite invite invite invites worship worship worship worship, but command command command commands it. No servant ever left her service who deserved to remain in it. And And And And, as she could choose with a glance of her eye, the servants she selected did in almost all cases deserve to remain, and they did remain. She was always cheerful; and she was always able to communicate her cheerfulness to others. During the nine years that we spent in poverty and debt, she was always able to reason me out of my despairs despairs despairs despairs, and find a bright side to the clouds clouds clouds clouds, and make me see it. In all that time time time time, I never knew her to utter a word of regret concerning our altered circumstances, nor did I ever know her children to do the like. For she had taught them, and they drew their fortitude from her. The love which she bestowed upon those whom she loved took the form of worship, and in that form it was returned—returned by relatives, friends, friends, friends, friends and the servants of her household. It was a strange combination which wrought into one individual, so to speak, by marriage—her disposition and character and mine. She poured out her prodigal affection affection affections affections affections in kisses and caresses, caresses, caresses, caresses, and in a vocabulary of endearments whose profusion was was were were was was always an astonishment to me. I was born reserved as to endearments of speech, speech, speech, speech and caresses, and hers broke upon me as the summer waves break upon Gibraltar Gibraltar Gibraltar Gibralter . I was reared in that atmosphere of reserve. As I have already said in an earlier chapter, said in an earlier chapter, said, said, in an earlier chapter, said, in another chapter, said, in another chapter, I never knew a member of my father’s family to kiss another member of it except once, and that at a death-bed. And our village was not a kissing community. The kissing and caressing ended with courtship—along with the deadly piano-playing piano-playing piano-playing piano-playing of that day. She had the heart-free laugh of a girl. It came seldom, but when it broke upon the ear it was as inspiring as music. I heard it for the last time when she had been occupying her sick-bed sick-bed sick bed sick-bed for more than a year, and I made a written written written written note of it at the time—a note not to be repeated. To-morrow will be the thirty-sixth anniversary. We were married in her father’s house in Elmira, New York, and went next day, by special train, to Buffalo, along with the whole Langdon family, and with the Beechers and the Twichells Twichells Twitchells Twichells , who had solemnized the marriage. We were to live in Buffalo, where I was to be one of the editors of the Buffalo Express, Express, Express, “Express,” and a part owner of the paper. I knew nothing about Buffalo, but I had made my household arrangements there through a friend, by letter. I had instructed him to find a boarding-house of as respectable a character as my light salary as editor would command. We were received at about nine o’clock at the station in Buffalo Buffalo Buffalo Buffalo, and were put into several sleighs and driven all over America, as it seemed to me—for apparently for apparently for apparently for, apparently, we turned all the corners in the town and followed all the streets there were—I scolding freely freely freely freely, and characterizing that friend of mine in very uncomplimentary words words ways ways words ways words words for securing a boarding-house that apparently had no definite locality. But there was a conspiracy—and my bride knew of it, but I was in ignorance. Her father, Jervis Jervis Gervaise Jervis Jervis Langdon, had bought and furnished a new house for us in the fashionable street, Delaware Avenue, and had laid in a cook and housemaids, housemaids, house-maids, housemaids, and a brisk and electric young coachman, an Irishman, Patrick McAleer—and we were being driven all over that city in order that one sleighful of those those these theose those people could have time to go to the house and see that the gas was lighted all over it, and a hot supper prepared for the crowd. We arrived at last, and when I entered that fairy place my indignation reached high-water mark, and without any reserve I delivered my opinion to that friend of mine for being so stupid as to put us into a boarding-house whose terms would be far out of my reach. Then Mr. Langdon brought forward a very pretty box and opened it it it it, it, and took from it a deed of the house. So the comedy ended very pleasantly, and we sat down to supper. The company departed about midnight, and left us alone in our new quarters. Then Ellen, the cook, came in to get orders for the morning’s marketing—and neither of us knew whether beefsteak was sold by the barrel or by the yard. We exposed our ignorance ignorance ignorance igorance , and Ellen was full of Irish delight over it. Patrick McAleer, that brisk young Irishman, Irishman, Irishman, Irishman, came in to get his orders for next day—and that was our first glimpse of him. him. him. him. . . . Thirty-six years have gone by. And this letter from Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell comes this morning, from Hartford. Hartford Hartford Hartford “Hartford . Jan Jan Jan Jan. 31. Dear Mark: I am sorry to say that the news about Patrick is very bad. I saw him Monday. He looked pretty well and was in cheerful spirits. He told me that he was fast recovering from an operation performed on him last week Wednesday, and would soon be out again. But a nurse who followed me from the room when I left told me that the poor fellow was deceived. The operation had simply disclosed the fact that nothing could be done for him. Yesterday I asked the Surgeon (Johnson, living opposite us) if that were so. so. so, so. He said ‘Yes’; ‘Yes’; ‘Yes’; ‘Yes;’ that the trouble was cancer of the liver and that there was no help for it in surgery; the case was quite hopeless; the end was not many weeks off. A pitiful case, indeed! Poor no ¶ Poor no ¶ Poor ¶ Poor Patrick! His face brightened when he saw me. He told me, the first thing, that he had just heard from Jean. His wife and son were with him. Whether they suspect the truth I don’t know. I doubt if the wife does: but the son looked very sober. May be May be May be Maybe he only has been told. Yrs Yrs Yrs Yrs. aff. Joe Joe Joe Joe.” Jean ¶ Jean ¶ Jean ¶ Jean had kept watch of Patrick’s case by correspondence with Patrick’s daughter Nancy, daughter Nancy, wife, daughter Nancy, daughter Nancy, and so we already knew that it was hopeless. In fact, the end seems to be nearer than Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell suspects. Last night I sent Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell word that I knew Patrick had only a day or two to live, and he must not forget to provide a memorial wreath and pin a card to it with my name and Clara’s and Jean’s, signed to it, worded “In loving remembrance of Patrick McAleer, faithful and valued friend of our family for thirty-six years.” I ¶ I ¶ I ¶ I wanted to say that he had served served served ‘served’ underscored served us thirty-six years, but some people would not have understood that. He served us constantly for twenty-six years. Then came that break when we spent nine or ten years in Europe. But if Patrick himself could see his funeral wreath—then I should certainly say, certainly say, certainly say, certainly say, in so many words, words, words, words, that he served us thirty-six years. For last summer, when we were located in the New Hampshire hills, at Dublin, we had Patrick with us. Jean had gone to Hartford the 1st of May and secured his services for the summer. Necessarily, a part of our household was Katy Katy Katiey Katy Leary, who has been on our roster on our roster a part of our household on our roster on our roster for twenty-six years; and years; and years;. A and period mended to a semicolon years; and one day Jean overheard Katy Katy Katiey Katy and Patrick disputing about this length of service. Katy Katy Katiey Katy said she had served the family longer than Patrick had. Patrick had. Patrick had. And Patrick had. Patrick said it was nothing of the kind; the kind; the kind—nothing of the kind; the kind; that he had already served the family ten years when Katy Katy Katiey Katy came, and that he had now served it it the family it it thirty-six years. He was just as brisk there in the New Hampshire hills as he was thirty-six years ago. He was sixty-four years old, but was just as slender, slender, slender, slender, and trim, trim, trim, trim, and handsome, and just as and just as and just as and just as alert and springy on his feet as he was in those long-vanished days of his youth. He was the most perfect man in his office that I have ever known, for this reason: reason: reason;: semicolon mended to a colon reason: that he never neglected any detail, detail, detail, Hobby inserted a comma and SLC retraced it detail, howsoever slight, of his duties, and there was never any occasion to give him an order about anything. He conducted his affairs without anybody’s help. There was always plenty of feed for the horses; the horses were always shod when they needed to be shod; the carriages and sleighs sleighs stalls sleighs sleighs were always attended to; he to; he to;—and he to; he kept everything in perfect order. It order. It order,. and iIt order. It was a great satisfaction to have such a man around. I was not capable of telling anybody what to do about anything. He was my particular servant, and I didn’t need to tell him anything at all. He was just the same in the New Hampshire hills. I never gave him an order while he was there, the whole five months; and there was never anything lacking that belonged in his jurisdiction. When we had been married a year or two Patrick took a wife, and they lived in a house which we built and added to the stable. They reared eight children. They lost one, two or three years ago—a thriving young man, assistant editor of a Hartford daily paper, I think. The children were all educated in the public schools and in the High School. They are all men and women now, of course. 187018721896 1870. . . 1872. . . 1896 (1870) . . . (1872) . . . (1896) typed in the margin, deleted by Harvey (1870) . . . (1872) . . . (1896) typed in the margin not in Our first child, Langdon Clemens, was born the 7th of November, 1870, and lived twenty-two months. Susy Susy Susiey Susy was born the 19th of March, 1872, and passed from life in the Hartford home, the 18th of August, August, August August, 1896. With her, when the end came, her, when the end came, her, when the end came, her, when the end came, were Jean, Jean, Jean, Jean, Jean and Katy Leary, Katy Leary, Katiey Leary, Katy Leary, and John and Ellen (the gardener and his wife) wife) wife) wife) faint typed parenthesis retraced . Clara and her mother and I arrived in England from around the world on the 31st of July, and took a house in Guildford Guildford Guildford Hobby queried this word on TS1, and SLC canceled her query . A week later, when Susy Susy Susiey Susy , Katy Katy Katiey Katy and Jean Jean Jean, Jean should have been arriving from America, we got a letter instead.