29 August 1907 Dictated August August Aug. 29, 1907 The Fourth of July Banquet at the Hotel Cecil, and copy of the official report of Mr. Clemens’s speech; also paragraph from President Murray Butler’s speech. The Fourth of July dinner that night was devoured in the great banqueting hall of the Hotel Cecil. Every chair on the floor was occupied by men, and all the seats in the gallery by ladies. It was a fine spectacle. Banqueteering is becoming more and more endurable as the years go by, both in England and America, for the reason that not so many speeches are permitted now as was formerly the case. If the feeding-task could now be cut down two-thirds, reducing the usual menu from fourteen courses to three and a half or four, men would no longer be justified in ranking the fear of death and the fear of the banquet together. My first experience of a banquet in a foreign country was in England, thirty-four years ago. It was in the Guildhall Guildhall Guild Hall ‘H’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’; words marked to close up , and it was said that there were nine hundred banqueteers present. I think it was the truth, for the din and crash and clash of a roaring and thundering and piercing confusion of sounds proceeding from an all-pervading storm of high-voiced high-voiced high-voiced conversation, and from the ceaseless collision of multitudinous knives and forks and plates, remains in my ears unto this day—dulled to a vague rumble and gnashing by lapse of time, but not wholly abolished, and never to be wholly abolished until I die. I die. [¶] I die. ¶ I was there there there, by appointment, to respond to a regular toast, of which there were nine! Nine to be responded to, and mine in the place of honor—the last! It was a a a fine a large distinction to confer upon a stranger, stranger, stranger, and I was properly proud of it; sorry for it too, for it broke my heart to wait so long; if I had had a hatful of hearts it would have broken them all. When at last the long, long, exhausting wait was ended, and my turn was come, and my gratitude rising up and pervading and supporting my whole system, a disaster befell: Sir John Bennett rose, uninvited, and began to speak. The indignation of the weary house burst out with the crash of an avalanche—a crash made up of shouts of protest and disapproval, powerfully aided and reinforced by deafening pounding of the tables with empty champagne bottles. But no matter—the gallant Sir John stood serene on the distant edge of the smoke and storm of battle and visibly worked his jaws and his arms, undismayed—and in silence, of course, for neither he nor any other man could hear a word that he was saying. He was one of the two outgoing outgoing out-going sheriffs, and it was said that he always made speeches at the great banquets; that he was never invited to make them; that no one had ever been able to find out whether they were good or bad, or neither, because nobody had ever heard one of them, since the tempest of resentment always broke out with his rising and never ceased until he finished his pantomime and sat down again. It was the most picturesque thing I have ever seen at a banquet except one, and I have the impression that I witnessed that one at the same dinner—to wit, as a doxology and good-night, good-night, good-night, that multitude of guests got up in a body, with one impulse, and stood in their chairs, with hands joined and one foot on the table, joined and one foot on the table, joined, and one foot on the table, and sang “Auld Auld Old Lang Syne;” then each man reached for a glass of champagne, held it on high for a moment, then drank it down—all in unison; then in unison they smashed the glasses upon the table—a fine and spirit-stirring spirit-stirring spirit-stirring effect. At the greatest of all American banquets—the banquet to General Grant, in Chicago in 1879 when he returned from around the world in . . . world in . . . world —there were actually sixteen sixteen sixteen ‘sixteen’ underscored regular toasts, and sixteen carefully prepared responses to them; again I had that high privilege, the place of honor—I was No. 16! If I remember rightly, that Guildhall Guildhall Guild Hall ‘H’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’; words marked to close up banquet and the Grant banquet lasted from half past half past half-past seven in the evening until after two in the morning; nobody died, but of course there were some close calls. At this recent Fourth of July banquet that I have been talking about, there were but four regular toasts and four speeches in response to them, and the function was over by about eleven o’clock. First the King’s health was drunk, standing, and in silence, in accordance with ancient and invariable custom; next the health of the President of the United States was drunk. Sir Mortimer Durand, late Ambassador Ambassador ambassador to the United States, responded to it in a happy speech of considerable length; next, in a good and elaborate speech, Whitelaw Reid proposed “The Day We We we Celebrate.” By appointment, I responded. I will here copy the official report of that effort, after striking out the bracketed “laughters” and “renewed laughters,” and so on: effort . . . so on: effort:, after striking out the bracketed “laughters” and “renewed laughters,” and so on: Mr. Chairman, my Lords and Gentlemen,—Once more it happens, as it has happened so often since I arrived in England a week or two ago, that instead of celebrating the Fourth of July properly as has been indicated, I have to first take care of my personal character. character. character. (Laughter.) Sir Mortimer Durand still remains unconvinced. Well, I tried to convince these people from the beginning that I did not take the Ascot Cup, Cup, Cup,—(laughter)— and as I have failed to persuade anybody that I did not take it, it, the Cup it, I might as well confess that I did take it, and be done with it. I don’t see why this uncharitable feeling should follow me everywhere, and why I should have that crime thrown up to me on all occasions. The tears that I have wept over it ought to have created a different feeling than this—and besides, I don’t think it is very right or fair that, considering England has been trying to take a Cup of ours for forty years, years, years,—(laughter)— they should make so much trouble when I try to go into the business myself. myself. myself. (Renewed laughter.) Sir Mortimer Durand, too, has had trouble from going to a dinner here, and he has told you what he suffered in consequence. But what did he suffer? He only missed his train and had to sit all night in his regimentals—I don’t know what they were. Why, that caused him only one night of discomfort, and he remembers it to this day. Oh, Oh, Oh!, if you could only think what I have suffered from a similar circumstance! circumstance! circumstance.! period mended to an exclamation point Two or three years ago in New York, with that society there which is made up of people from all British Colonies, and from Great Britain generally, who were educated in British colleges and British schools, I was there to respond to a toast of some kind or other, and I did then what I have been in the habit of doing from a selfish motive for a long time, and that is, I got myself placed No. No. number 3 in the list of speakers—then you get home early. I had to go five miles up river and had to catch a particular train, or not get there. But see the magnanimity which is born in me, and which I have cultivated all my life. A very famous and very great British clergyman came to me presently, and said said he said , “I am away down in the list, I have got to catch a certain train this Saturday night, if I don’t catch that train I shall be carried beyond midnight, and break the Sabbath. Won’t you change places with me?” I said, “Certainly I will.” I did it at once. Now see what happened. Talk about Sir Mortimer Durand’s sufferings for a single night—I have suffered ever since, since, since, because I saved that gentleman from breaking the Sabbath—saved him. I took his place, but I lost my train, and it was I who broke the Sabbath. Up to that time I never had broken the Sabbath in my life, and from that day to this I never have kept it. it. it. (Loud laughter.) Our Ambassador has spoken of our Fourth of July and the noise it makes. We have a double Fourth of July, a daylight Fourth and a midnight Fourth. During the day in America, as our Ambassador has indicated, we keep the Fourth of July properly in a reverent spirit. We devote it to teaching our children patriotic things, and and and reverence for the Declaration of Independence. We honour the day all through the daylight hours, and when night comes we dishonor it. Two hours from now, on the Atlantic coast when night shuts down, that pandemonium will begin and there will be noise, and noise, and noise, all night long, and there will be more than noise—there will be people crippled, there will be people killed, there will be people who will lose their eyes, and all through that permission which we give to irresponsible boys to play with firearms and firecrackers and all sorts of dangerous things. We turn that Fourth of July alas! over to rowdies to drink and get drunk and make the night hideous, and we cripple and kill more people than you would imagine. We probably began to celebrate our Fourth of July night in that way a hundred and twenty-five years ago, and on every Fourth of July night since, these horrors have grown and grown until now, in the most of the most of the most of our five thousand towns of America, somebody gets killed or crippled on every Fourth of July night, besides those cases of sick persons whom we never hear of, who die afterward afterward afterward as the result of the noise or the shock. They cripple and kill more people on the Fourth of July, in America, than they kill and cripple in our American wars nowadays, and there are no pensions for these folk. And, too, we burn houses. We We Really wWe destroy more property on every Fourth of July night than the whole of the United States was worth a hundred and twenty-five years ago. Really, our Fourth of July is our Day Day dDay of Mourning Mourning mMourning, , our Day Day dDay of Sorrow Sorrow sSorrow . Fifty thousand people who have lost friends, or who have had friends crippled, receive that Fourth of July, when it comes, as a day of mourning for the losses they have long ago long ago long ago sustained in their families. I have suffered in that way myself. I have had relatives killed in that way. One was in Chicago years ago—an uncle of mine, just as good an uncle as I have ever had, and I have had lots of them—yes yes (laughter)—yes , uncles to burn, uncles to spare. spare. spare. (Renewed laughter.) This poor uncle, full of patriotism, opened his mouth to hurrah, and a rocket went down his throat. throat. throat. (Laughter.) Before that man could ask for a drink of water to quench that thing it blew up and scattered him all over the forty-five States, and—now now really, now , this is true, I know about it myself—twenty-four hours after that it was raining buttons, recognisable as his, the whole length of the Atlantic seaboard. seaboard. seaboard. (Laughter.) A person cannot have a disaster like that and be entirely cheerful the rest of his life. I had another uncle on an entirely different Fourth of July who was blown up that way, and really it trimmed him as it would a tree. He had hardly a limb left on him anywhere. All we have left now is an expurgated edition of him. him. him. (Laughter.) But never mind about these things, they are merely passing matters. Don’t let me make you sad. sad. sad. (Loud laughter.) Sir Mortimer Durand said that you, the English people, gave up your Colonies over there—got tired of them—and did it with some reluctance. Now I wish you just to consider that he was right about that, and that he had his reasons for saying that England did not look upon our Revolution as a foreign war, but as a civil war fought by Englishmen. Our Fourth of July which we honour so much, and which we love so much, and which we take so much pride in, is an English institution, not an American one, and it comes of a great ancestry. The first Fourth of July in that noble genealogy dates back seven centuries lacking eight years. That is the day of the Great Charter—the Magna Charta—which was born at Runnymede in the next to the last year of King John, and portions of the liberties forced thus by those hardy Barons from that reluctant King are a part of our Declaration of Independence, of our Fourth of July, of our American liberties. And the second of those Fourths of July—also English—was not born until four centuries later, in Charles I’s I’s Is time, in the Bill of Rights, and that is ours by inheritance, it is part of our liberties. The next one was still English, conceived and secured by Englishmen in New England, where they established that principle which remains with us to this day, and will continue to remain with us—no taxation without representation. That Fourth is always going to stand, and that Fourth the English Colonists Colonists Coloniessts in New England gave us. The fourth fourth present fourth Fourth of July, the the and the one which you are celebrating now, born in Philadelphia on the Fourth of July, 1776, is English, is English, that is English, too. It is not American. Those were English colonists, subjects of King George III, Englishmen at heart, who protested against the oppressions of the Home Government. Though they proposed to cure those oppressions and remove them, still remaining under the Crown, they were not intending a revolution. The revolution was brought about by circumstances which they could not control. The Declaration of Independence was written by a British subject, every name signed to it was the name of a British subject, there subject, there subject. T, there was not the name of a single American attached to it— it— the Declaration of Independence—it— in fact, there was not an American in the country in that day except the Indians out in the forests. They were Englishmen, all Englishmen—Americans did not begin to exist until seven years later, when that Fourth of July was seven years old and the American Republic established. Since then then then ‘then’ underscored there have been Americans. So you see what we owe to England in the matter of Liberties. We have, however, one Fourth of July which is absolutely our own, and that is that memorable proclamation issued forty years ago by that great American to whom Sir Mortimer Durand paid that just and beautiful tribute—Abraham Lincoln: a proclamation which not only set the black slave free, but set his white owner free also. The owner was set free from that burden and offence, that sad condition of things where he was in so many instances a master and owner of slaves when he did not want to be. That proclamation set them all free. But even in this matter England led the way, for she had set her slaves free thirty years before, and we but followed her example. We always follow her example, whether it is good or bad. And it was an English judge, a century ago, that issued that other great proclamation, and established that great principle, that, when a slave— slave— slave,— let him belong to whom he may, and let him come whence he may— may— may,— sets his foot upon English soil, his fetters by that act fall away and he is a free man before the world! It is true, then, that all our Fourths of July, and we have five of them, England gave to us, except that one that I have mentioned—the Emancipation Proclamation; and let us not forget that we owe this debt to her. Let us be able to say to Old England, this great-hearted great-hearted great-hearted, venerable You You yYou old mother of the race, gave us our Fourths of July that we love and honour honour that we honour and revere, you gave us the Declaration of Independence, which is the Charter of our rights, you, the venerable Mother of Liberties, the Champion and Protector of Anglo-Saxon Freedom—you gave us these things, and we do most honestly thank you for them! them! them.! (Loud applause.) period mended to an exclamation point The next and last speech was made by President Murray Butler, of Columbia University, in response to the toast to “Our Guests.” I will select, and insert here, a remark from his speech, speech, speech, because it pays me a compliment. The reason I do not put in the rest of his speech is because it dealt with other matters. Speeches which do not deal with me I regard as irrelevancies. To my mind the most significant fact about this celebration of the Fourth of July is that the celebration is held with the greatest of cordiality and goodwill, and with the favouring and gracious presence of the leaders of British thought and action, in the capital of the British Empire itself. Is it possible for any one of us to think that such a gathering could take place anywhere else in the world as between a motherland and a nation, once colonial, now independent? It is unthinkable, because the reasons which make possible this celebration in the British capital apply to Great Britain and America alone. Some of these reasons have been touched upon by Dr. Clemens in the very beautiful and eloquent passage at the close of his speech. He has pointed out with absolute fidelity to historical fact that we are celebrating, not something which Englishmen do not want and do not believe in, but something which England throughout its history has fought for and stood for. (Applause.)