[A Call with W. D. Howells on General Grant] [A Call with W. D. Howells on General Grant] [A Call with W. D. Howells on General Grant] not in Howells 1881. Howells 1881. flush left 1881. centered on the next line Howells. Howells wrote me that his old father, who is well along in the seventies, was in great distress about his poor little consulate, up in Quebec. Somebody not being satisfied with the degree of poverty already conferred upon him by by by the a thoughtful and beneficent Providence, was anxious to add to it by acquiring the Quebec consulate. So consulate. So consulate.— So Howells thought that if we could get General Grant to say a word to President Arthur it might have the effect of stopping this effort to oust old Mr. Mr. Mr Howells from his position. Therefore, at my suggestion Howells came down and we went went awent to New York to lay the matter before the General. We found him at number 2, Wall street, in the principal office of Grant and Ward, brokers. I stated the case and asked him if he wouldn’t write a word on a card which Howells could carry to Washington and hand to the President. But, as usual, General Grant was his natural natural natural blank space left for word on TS self—that is to say, ready and also determined to do a great deal more for you than you could possibly have the effrontery to ask him to do. Apparently he never meets anybody half way: he comes nine-tenths of the way himself voluntarily. “No” he said,—he would do better than that and cheerfully: he was going to Washington in a couple of days to dine with with wih with the President and he would speak to him himself and make it a personal matter. matter. matter . . . Now as General Grant not only never forgets a promise but never even even even the shadow of a promise, promise, promise, he did as as as he said he would do, and within a week came a letter from the Secretary of State, Mr. Frelinghuysen Frelinghuysen Freyleinghuysen , to say that in no case would old Mr. Howells be disturbed. [And he wasn’t. He resigned, a couple of years later.] [And . . . later.] And . . . later. Grant and Derby 1881. Grant and Derby 1881. flush left 1881. centered on the next line Grant and Derby. But ¶ But (Howells interview continued) ¶ But to go back to the interview with General Grant, he was in a humor to talk—in fact he was always in a humor to talk when no strangers were present—and he resisted all our efforts to leave him. He forced us to stay and take luncheon in a private room and continued to talk all the time. [It was bacon and beans. Nevertheless, “How he sits and towers”—Howells, quoting from Dante.] [It . . . Dante.] It . . . Dante. He remembered “Squibob” Derby at West Point very well. He said that Derby was forever forever for ever drawing caricatures caricatures caractures of the professors and playing jokes of all kinds on everybody. He also told of one thing, which I had heard before, but which I have never seen in print. At West Point, the professor was instructing and questioning a class concerning certain particulars of a possible siege siege siege, and he said this, as nearly as I can remember: I cannot quote General Grant’s words: words: words.: period mended to a colon Given: That a thousand men are besieging a fortress whose equipment of men, provisions, etc. etc. &c. , are so and so—it is a military axiom axiom maxim axiom that at the end of forty-five forty-five 45 days the fort will surrender. Now, young men, if any of you were in command of such a fortress, how would would w’d you proceed? Derby held up his hand in token that he had an answer for that question. He said: “I would march out, let the enemy in, out, let the enemy in, out, place let the enemy in, and at the end of forty-five forty-five 45 days I would change places with him.” him.” him.” Grant’s Memoirs 1881. Grant’s Memoirs 1881. flush left 1881. centered on the same line Grant’s Memoirs. I ¶ I (Howell interview continued.) ¶ I tried very hard to get General Grant to write his personal memoirs for publication but he would not listen to the suggestion. His inborn diffidence made him shrink from voluntarily coming forward before the public and placing himself under under in under criticism as an author author other author . He had no confidence in his ability to write well, whereas I I I, and everybody else in the world world world, excepting himself himself himself, are are is aware that he possesses an admirable literary gift and style. He was also sure that the book would have no sale and of course that would be a humiliation, too. He instanced the fact that General General Gen. Badeau’s Badeau’s Bardou’s Badeau’s military history of General Grant had had but a trifling sale, sale, sale, and that John Russell Young’s account of General Grant’s trip around the globe had hardly any sale at all. But I said that these were not instances in point; point; point.; period mended to a semicolon that what another man might tell about General Grant was nothing, while what General Grant should tell about himself himself himself, with his own pen pen pen, was a totally different thing. I said that the book would have an enormous sale: that it should be in two volumes sold sold sold, in cash cash cash, at $3 50 apiece, apiece, a piece, and that the sale in two volumes would certainly reach half a million sets. I said that that that, from my my mey experience experience experience, I could save him from making unwise contracts with publishers publishers publishers, and could also suggest the best plan of publication—the subscription plan—and find for him the best men in that line of business. I had in my mind at that time the American Publishing Company of Hartford, and and and, while I suspected that they had been swindling me for ten years years years, I was well aware that I could arrange the contract in such a way that they could not swindle General Grant. But the General said that he had no necessity necessity necessity and no for any addition to his income. I knew that he meant by that that his investments investments investments, through the firm in which his sons were partners partners partners, were paying him all the money he needed. So I was not able to persuade him to write a book. He said that some day he would make very full notes and leave them behind him him him; and then then then, if his children chose to make them into a book book book, that would answer.