15 January 1906 January January Jan. 15, 1906 Rev. Dr. Burton swung his leonine head around, focussed me with his eye, and said: “When was it that this happened?” “In June, ’58.” “It is a good many years ago. Have you told it several times since?” “Yes, I have, a good many times.” “How many?” “Why, Why, Why Why, Why, I don’t know how many.” “Well, strike an average. How many times a year do you think you have told it?” “Well Well Well Well, Well, I have told it as many as six times a year, possibly oftener.” “Very well, then you’ve told it, we’ll say, say, say, say, seventy or eighty times since it happened?” “Yes,” “Yes,” “Yes,” “Yes,” I said, “that’s a conservative estimate.” “Now then, Mark, a very extraordinary thing happened to me a great many years ago, and I used to tell it a number of times—a good many times—every year, for it was so wonderful that it always astonished the hearer, and that astonishment gave me a distinct pleasure every time. I never suspected that that tale was acquiring any auxiliary advantages through repetition until one day after I had been telling it ten or fifteen years it struck me that either I was getting old, and slow in delivery, or that the tale was longer than it was when it was born. Mark, I diligently and prayerfully examined that tale with this result: that I found that its proportions were now, as nearly as I could make out, one part fact, straight fact, fact pure and undiluted, golden fact, and twenty-four parts embroidery. I never told that tale afterwards—I was never able to tell it again, for I had lost confidence in it, and so the pleasure of telling it was gone, and gone permanently. How much of this tale of yours is embroidery?” “Well,” “Well,” “Well,” “Well,” I said said said said, said, “I don’t know. I don’t think any of it is embroidery. I think it is all just as I have stated it, detail by detail.” “Very well,” he said, “then it is all right, but I wouldn’t tell it any more; more; more,; comma mended to a semicolon more; because if you keep on, on, on, on, it will begin to collect embroidery sure. The safest thing is to stop now.” That was a great many years ago. And to-day is the first time that I have told that dream since Dr. Burton scared me into fatal doubts about it. No, I don’t believe I can say that. I don’t believe that I ever really really not in really really had any doubts whatever concerning the salient points of the dream, for those points are of such a nature that they are pictures, and pictures can be remembered, when they are they are they are theyare Munro restored ‘are’, which was inadvertently dropped; SLC accepted the correction by canceling Munro’s query vivid, much better than one can remember remarks and unconcreted facts. Although it has been so many years since I have told that dream, I can see those pictures now just as clearly defined as if they were before me in this room. I have not told the entire dream. There was a good deal more of it. I mean I have not told all that happened in the dream’s fulfillment fulfillment fulfillment fulfilment . After the incident in the death room death room death room death-room I may mention one detail, and that is this. When I arrived in St. Louis with the casket it was about eight o’clock in the morning, and I ran to my brother-in-law’s place of business, hoping to find him there, but I missed him, for while I was on the way to his office he was on his way from the house to the boat. When I got back to the boat the casket was gone. He had conveyed it out to his house. I hastened thither, and when I arrived the men were just removing the casket from the vehicle to carry it up stairs up stairs up-stairs . I stopped that procedure, for I did not want my mother to see the dead face, because one side of it was drawn and distorted by the effects of the opium. When I went up stairs, up stairs, up-stairs up-stairs, up-stairs, there stood the two chairs—placed to receive the coffin— chairs—placed to receive the coffin— chairs chairs —placed to receive the coffin— chairs—placed to receive the coffin— just as just as which which just as just as I had seen them them not in them them in my dream; dream; dream, dream,; comma mended to a semicolon dream; and if I had arrived arrived arrived there arrived there arrived two or three minutes later, the casket would have been resting upon them, them, those two chairs, those two chairs, them, them, precisely precisely just just precisely precisely as in my dream of several weeks before. Now then, Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell —but never mind about Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell . There is a telephone message from his daughter, Mrs. Wood, to say he is in town and will come here to dinner and stay all night. Now . . . night. Now . . . night. Now . . . all night. sidelined in blue pencil, probably by Paine, to suggest omission, then deleted in pencil not in I think it was at that same dream meeting that a very curious thing happened. It didn’t happen then—it happened in the night, afterward. No, it didn’t happen there at all. It happened at the house of James Goodwin, father of Reverend Reverend Rev. Francis Goodwin, and also father of the great Connecticut Mutual Insurance Company. Mr. James Goodwin was an old man at the time that I speak of, but in his young days, when he used to drive stage between Hartford and Springfield, he conceived the idea of starting a Mutual Insurance Company, and he collected a little capital in the way of subscriptions—enough to start the business in a modest way—and he gave away the rest of the stock where he could find people willing to accept it—(though they were rather scarce) and now he had lived to see that stock worth two hundred and fifty and nobody willing to sell at that price, or any other. He had long ago forgotten how to drive stage—but it was no matter. He was worth seven millions, and didn’t need to work for a living any longer. Reverend Reverend Rev. Frank Goodwin, his son, an Episcopal clergyman, was a man of many accomplishments; and among others, he was an architect. He planned and built a huge granite mansion for his father, and I think it was in that mansion that that curious thing happened that night. However I don’t know about that. No, it didn’t happen there. It happened in Francis Goodwin’s own house in the neighborhood. I don’t mind excursioning around in an autobiography—there is plenty of room. I don’t mind it so long as I get the things right at last, last, last, last, when they are important. It happened in this way. Frank Frank Frank . . . . Rev. Frank Goodwin had a burglar alarm in his house. The annunciator was right at his ear, on the port side of his bed. He would put the whole house on the alarm—every window and every door—at bedtime, then, at five o’clock in the morning the cook would descend from her bedroom bedroom bed-room and open the kitchen door and that would set the alarm to buzzing in Goodwin’s ear. Now as that happened every morning straight along, week in and week out, Goodwin soon became so habituated to it that it didn’t disturb him. It aroused him, partly, from his sleep sometimes sometimes sometimes not in —sometimes it probably did not affect his sleep at all, but from old habit he would automatically put out his left hand and shut off that alarm. By that act he shut off the alarm from the entire house, leaving not a window or a door on it it the alarm it it from five o’clock in the morning thenceforth until he should set the alarm the next night at bedtime bedtime bed-time . The night that I speak of was one of those dismal New England November nights, close upon the end of the month, when the pestiferous New England climate furnishes those regions a shake-down just in the way way wasy way of experiment and to get its hand in for business when the proper time comes, which is December. Well, the wind howled, and the snow blew along in clouds when we left that house about midnight. It was a wild night. It was like a storm at sea, for boom and crash and roar and furious snow-drive. It was no kind of a night for burglars to be out in, and yet they were out. Goodwin was in bed, bed, bed, bed, with his house on the alarm by half past half past half-past twelve. Not very long afterward the burglars arrived. Evidently they knew all about the burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm , because instead of breaking into the kitchen they sawed their way in—that is to say, they sawed a great panel out of the kitchen door and stepped in without alarming the alarm. They went all over the house at their leisure; they collected all sorts of trinkets and trumpery; and and and and all of the silverware. They carried these things to the kitchen, put them in bags, and then they gathered together a sumptuous supper, with champagne and Burgundy, and so on, and ate that supper at their leisure. Then when they were ready to leave—say at three o’clock in the morning—the champagne and the Burgundy had had an influence, and they became careless for a moment, but one moment was enough. In that careless moment a burglar unlocked and unlocked and unlocked and unlocked and opened the kitchen door, and of course the alarm went off. Rev. Mr. Goodwin put out his left hand and shut it off it off off the alarm it off the alarm and went on sleeping peacefully, but the burglars bounded out of the place and left all their swag behind them. A burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm is a valuable thing if you know how to utilize it. When Rev. Mr. Goodwin Mr. Goodwin Frank Frank Mr. Goodwin was finishing his father’s mansion, mansion, mansion, mansion, (he was the architect,) I was passing by one day. I thought I would go in and see how the house was coming along, and in the first room I entered I found Mr. Goodwin and a paperhanger paperhanger paperhanger paper-hanger paper-hanger . Then Mr. Goodwin told me this curious story. He said, said, said “This ¶ “This no ¶ “This ¶ “This room has been waiting a good while. This is Morris paper, and it didn’t hold out. You will see there is one space there, from the ceiling half way half way half-way to the floor, which is blank. I sent to New York and ordered some more of the paper—it couldn’t be furnished. I applied in Philadelphia and in Boston, with the same result. There was not a bolt of that paper left in America, so far as any of these people knew. I wrote to London. The answer came back in those same monotonous terms—that paper was out of print—not a yard of it to be found. Then I told the paperhanger to strip the paper off and we would replace it with some other pattern, pattern, pattern, pattern, and I was very sorry, because I preferred that pattern to any other. Just then a farmer-looking man halted in front of the house, started to walk that single-plank approach, approach, approach, approach, that you have you have you you have just walked, and come in; but in; but in;. Bbut period mended to a semicolon in; but he saw that sign up there—‘No admittance’—a sign which did not obstruct your excursion into this place—but it halted him him him him ‘him’ underscored . I said ‘Come in, come in.’ He came in, and this being the first room on the route, he naturally glanced in. He saw the paper on the wall and remarked casually ‘I am acquainted with that pattern. I’ve got a bolt of it at home down on my farm in Glastonbury.’ It didn’t take long to strike up a trade with him for that bolt, which had been lying in his farm-house farm-house farm-house for he didn’t know how long, and he hadn’t any use for it—and now we are finishing up that lacking patch there.” It was only a coincidence, but I think it was a very curious and interesting one. there.” ¶ It was . . . one. there.” there.” centered (Copy of clipping from New York Times. there.” ¶ It was . . . one. MRS. MRS. MRS. “MRS MORRIS’S ILLNESS TAKES A SERIOUS TURN Cabinet Officers Urge President to Disavow Violence to Her. A DISCUSSION IN THE HOUSE Mr. Sheppard Criticises the President and Republican Leaders Try to Stop Him. Special to The New York Times. washington, Jan. 10.—Mrs. Minor Morris, who on Thursday was dragged from the White House, is to-night in a critical condition. She seemed to be on the road to recovery on Saturday, and her physicians held out hopes that she would be able to be out by Monday. At the beginning of this week her condition took an unfavorable turn, and she has been growing steadily worse. She had a congestive chill to-day and has continued to grow worse. It is evident to-night that her nervous system has suffered something approaching a collapse. The bruises inflicted upon her by the policemen have not disappeared, a striking evidence of their severity. Her arms, shoulders, and neck still bear testimony to the nature of her treatment. Mentally and physically she is suffering severely. It was learned to-day that two Cabinet officers, one of whom is Secretary Taft, have been laboring with the President for two days to get him to issue a statement disavowing the action of Assistant Secretary Barnes, who ordered Mrs. Morris expelled, and expressing his regret for the way she was treated. They have also urged him to promise to take action which will make impossible the repetition of such an occurrence. The President has held out stoutly against the advice of these two Cabinet officers. He authorized Mr. Barnes to make the statement that he gave out, in which the treatment of Mrs. Morris was justified, and it is not easy to take the other tack now. On high authority, however, it is learned that the two Cabinet officers have not ceased their labors. They both look on the matter not as “a mere incident,” but as a serious affair. The Morris incident was brought up in the House to-day just before adjournment by Mr. Sheppard of Texas. He was recognized for fifteen minutes, in the ordinary course of the debate on the Philippine Tariff bill, and began at once to discuss the resolution he introduced Monday calling for an investigation of the expulsion. He excused himself for speaking on the resolution at this time, saying that as it was not privileged he could not obtain its consideration without the consent of the Committee on Rules. He went on to describe the incident at the White House. He had proceeded only a minute or two when he was interrupted by Gen. Grosvenor, who rose to the point of order that the remarks were not germane to the Philippine Tariff bill. “I will show the gentleman that it is germane,” cried Mr. Sheppard. “It is just as proper for this country to have a Chinese wall around the White House as it is to have such a wall around the United States.” “Well, if he thinks it is proper to thus arraign the President and his household,” said Mr. Grosvenor, “let him go on.” “If the President had heard the howl of a wolf or the growl of a bear from the adjacent offices,” retorted Mr. Sheppard, “the response would have been immediate, but the wail of an American woman fell upon unresponsive ears.” There had been several cries of protest when Gen. Grosvenor interrupted Mr. Sheppard, many of whose Democratic friends gathered about him and urged him to proceed. They applauded his reply to Mr. Grosvenor, and the Ohioan did not press his point. “These unwarrantable and unnecessary brutalities,” continued Mr. Sheppard, “demand an investigation. Unless Congress takes some action we shall soon witness in a free republic a condition where citizens cannot approach the President they have created without fear of bodily harm from arbitrary subordinates.” Mr. Sheppard had nearly reached the close of his remarks when Mr. Payne, the titular floor leader of the Republicans, renewed the Grosvenor point of order. Mr. Olmstead of Pennsylvania, in the chair, however, ruled that with the House sitting in Committee of the Whole on the state of the Union, remarks need not be germane. Mr. Payne interrupted again, to ask a question. “If a gentleman has the facts upon which to found his attack,” he said, “does he not think the police court is the better place to air them?” “The suggestion is a reflection upon the gentleman himself, although he is a friend of mine,” replied Sheppard. When the speech was finished Grosvenor got the floor and said he had been aware of the rules when he did not press his point. “But I made the point,” he continued, “merely to call the attention of the young gentleman from Texas in a mild and fatherly manner, to my protest against his remarks. I hoped he would refrain from further denunciation of the President. He has introduced a resolution which is now pending before the proper committee. That resolution asks for facts and I supposed that the gentleman would wait for the facts until that resolution is brought into the House. “I know no difference in proper conduct between the President’s office and household and the humblest home in this Nation, but I don’t believe a condition has arisen such that the husband of this woman cannot take care of the situation.” A high Government official to-night added to the accounts of the expulsion an incident, which he said was related to him by an eyewitness. While the policemen and their negro assistant were dragging Mrs. Morris through the grounds the scene was witnessed by the women servants, some of whom called out, “Shame!” One of the policemen pressed his hand down on Mrs. Morris’s mouth to stifle her cries for help, and at that sight a man servant, a negro, rushed forward and shouted: “Take your hand off that white woman’s face! Don’t treat a white woman that way!” The policeman paid no attention to the man, and continued his efforts to stifle Mrs. Morris’s cries. The reason I want to insert to insert to insert to insert that account of the Morris case, which is making such a lively stir all over the United States, and possibly the entire world, in these days, is this. Some day, no doubt these autobiographical notes will be published. It will be after my death. It may be five years from now, it may be ten, it may be fifty— fifty— twenty-five— fifty— fifty— but whenever the time shall come, even if it should be a century hence—I claim that the reader of that day will find the same strong interest in that narrative that the world has in it to-day, for the reason that the account speaks of the thing in the language we naturally use when we are talking about something that has just happened. That form of narrative is able to carry along with it for ages and ages the very same interest which we find in it to-day. Whereas if this had happened fifty years ago, or a hundred a hundred one a hundred a hundred , and the historian had dug it up and was putting it in his language, and furnishing you a long-distance view of it, the reader’s interest in it would be pale. You see, see, see, see, it would not be news news news ‘news’ underscored news to him, it would be history; merely history; and history can carry on no successful competition with news, in the matter of sharp interest. When no ¶ When no ¶ When x x x xWhen ¶ . . . . When an eye-witness sets down in narrative form some extraordinary occurrence which he has witnessed, that is news news news ‘news’ underscored news —that is the news form, and its interest is absolutely indestructible; time can have no deteriorating effect upon that episode. I am placing that account there largely as an experiment. If any stray copy of this book shall, by any any any any chance, escape the paper-mill for a century or so, and then be discovered and read, I am betting that that remote reader will find that it is still news news news ‘news’ underscored news , and that it is just as interesting as any news he will find in the newspapers of his day and morning—if newspapers shall still be in existence then—though let us hope they won’t. I . . . won’t. I . . . won’t. I . . . won’t. bracketed and queried, then deleted not in These notions were born to me in the fall of 1867, in Washington. That is to say, thirty-nine years ago. I had come back from the Quaker City Quaker City Quaker City Excursion. I had gone to Washington to write “The Innocents Abroad,” but before beginning that book it was necessary to earn some money to live on meantime, or borrow it—which would be difficult, or take it where it reposed unwatched—which would be unlikely. So I started the first Newspaper Correspondence Syndicate that an unhappy world ever saw. I started it in conjunction with William Swinton, a brother of the Admirable John Swinton. William Swinton was a brilliant creature, highly educated, accomplished. He was such a contrast to me that I did not know which of us most to admire, because both ends of a contrast are equally delightful to me. A thoroughly beautiful woman and a thoroughly homely woman are creations which I love to gaze upon, and which I cannot tire of gazing upon, for each is perfect in her own line, and it is perfection, I think, in many things, and perhaps most things, which is the quality that fascinates us. A splendid literature charms us; but it doesn’t charm me me me me any more than than thatn than its opposite does— does— does,— does— “hog-wash” literature. At another time I will explain that word, “hog-wash,” and offer an example of it which lies here on the bed—a book which was lately sent to me from England, or Ireland. Swinton kept a jug. It was sometimes full, but seldom as full as himself—and it was when he was fullest that he was most competent with his pen. A . . . pen. A . . . pen. A . . . pen. bracketed and queried, then deleted not in We wrote a letter apiece once a week and copied them them them, with the pen, them and sent them to twelve newspapers, charging each of the newspapers a dollar apiece. And although we didn’t get rich, it kept the jug going and partly fed the two of us. We earned the rest of our living with magazine articles. My trade in that line was better than his, because I had written six letters for the New York Tribune while I was out on the Quaker City Quaker City Quaker City Excursion, and one pretty breezy one for the New York Herald after I got back, and so I had a good deal of a reputation to trade on. Every now and then I was able to get twenty-five dollars for a magazine article. Riley and I were supporting the cheap boarding-houses at that time. It took two of us to do it, and even then the boarding-houses perished. I have always believed, since, that cheap boarding-houses that do business on credit make a mistake—but let Riley Riley Reiley Riley go for the present. I will speak of him another time. Riley . . . time. Oh, Reiley Riley . . . time. Riley . . . time. marked in the margin and queried, then deleted; several words preceding ‘Riley’ canceled in error and restored with the instruction ‘stet’ not in I had a chance to write a magazine article about an ancient and moss-grown claim which was disturbing Congress that session, a claim which had been disturbing Congress ever since the War War war of 1812, and was always getting paid, but never satisfied. The claim was for Indian corn Indian corn Indian-corn and for provender consumed by the American troops in Maryland or somewhere around there, in the War War war of 1812. I wrote the article, and it is in one of my books, and is there called “Concerning the Great Beef Contract.” It was necessary to find out the price of Indian corn in 1812, and I found that detail a little difficult. Finally I went to A. R. Spofford, who was the Librarian the Librarian the Librarian Librarian of Congress then—Spofford the man with the prodigious memory,— memory,— memory,— memory— and I put my case before him. He knew every volume in the Library and what it contained, and where it was located. He said promptly, “I know of only two sources which promise to afford this information: information: information; information: ‘Tooke on Prices’ ‘Tooke on Prices’ “Tooke on Prices” ” (he brought me the book) “and “and “and “and the New York Evening Post. Post. Post. Post.” In those days newspapers did not publish market reports, but about 1809 the New York Evening Post began to print market reports reports reports reports reports on sheets of paper about note-paper size, and fold fold folded fold these in the journal.” journal.” journal.” journal. He brought me a file of the Evening Post for 1812. I examined “Tooke” and then began to examine the Post—and I was in a great hurry. I had less than an hour at my disposal. But in the Post I found a personal narrative which chained my attention at once. It was a letter from a gentleman who had witnessed the arrival of the British and the burning of the Capitol. The matter was bristling with interest for him and he delivered his words hot from the bat. That letter must must must much have been read with fiery and absorbing interest three days later in New York, but not with any more absorbing interest than the interest which was making my blood leap fifty-nine years later. When I finished that account I found I had used up all the time that was at my disposal, and more.