21 December 1906 Friday, December 21, 1906 Friday, December 21, 1906 Friday, Dec. 21, 1906. Dictated Friday, Dec. 21, 1906. Munro marked the dateline to precede ‘I wish’ at 326.34 [Dictated December 21, 1906.] Mainly from Susy’s Biography—About About about not in the “Christian Union” article; the mother’s methods of punishment, etc., with a few comments by Mr. Clemens. I wish to insert here some pages of Susy’s Biography of me in which the biographer does not scatter, according to her custom, but sticks pretty steadily to a single subject until she has fought it to a finish. finish. finish. finish: From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. not in Feb. 27, ’86. Last no ¶ Feb. 27, ’86. [¶] Last no ¶ Feb. 27, ’86. [¶] Last no ¶ Feb. 27, ’86.— Last ‘Last’ marked to run on [¶] Feb. 27, ’86.—Last summer while we were in Elmira an article came out in the “Christian Union” by name “What ought he to have done” treating of the government of children, or rather giving an account of a fathers battle with his little baby boy, by the mother of the child and put in the form of a question as to whether the father disciplined the child corectly or not; different people wrote their opinions of the fathers behavior, and told what they thought he should have done. Mamma had long known how to disciplin children, for in fact the bringing up of children had been one of her specialties for many years. She had a great many theories, but one of them was, that if a child was big enough to be nauty, it was big enough to be whipped and here we all agreed with her. I remember one morning when Dr. ——— came up to the farm he had a long discussion with mamma, upon the following topic. Mamma gave this as illustrative of one important rule for punishing a child. She said we will suppose the boy has thrown a handkerchief onto the floor, I tell him to pick it up, he refuses. I tell him again, he refuses. Then I say you must either pick up the handkerchief or have a whipping. My theory is never to make a child have a whipping and pick up the handkerchief too. I say “If you do not pick it up, I must punish you,” if he doesn’t he gets the whipping, but I pick up the handkerchief, if he does he gets no punishment. I tell him to do a thing if he disobeys me he is punished for so doing, but not forced to obey me afterwards.” afterwards.” afterwards.” afterwards.” afterwards. When Clara and I had been very nauty or were being very nauty, the nurse would go and call Mamma and she would appear suddenly and look at us (she had a way of looking at us when she was displeased as if she could see right through us) till we were ready to sink through the floor from embarasment, and total absence of knowing what to say. This look was usually followed with “Clara” or “Susy what do you mean by this? do you want to come to the bath-room with me?” Then followed the climax for Clara and I both new only too well what going to the bath-room meant. But mamma’s first and foremost object was to make the child understand that he is being punished for his sake, and because the mother so loves him that she cannot allow him to do wrong; also that it is as hard for her to punish him as for him to be punished and even harder. Mamma never allowed herself to punish us when she was angry with us she never struck us because she was enoyed at us and felt like striking us if we had been nauty and had enoyed her, so that she thought she felt or would show the least bit of temper toward us while punnishing us, she always postponed the punishment until she was no more chafed by our behavior. She never humored herself by striking or punishing us because or while she was the least bit enoyed with us. Our very worst nautinesses were punished by being taken to the bath-room and being whipped by the paper cutter. But after the whipping was over, mamma did not allow us to leave her until we were perfectly happy, and perfectly understood why we had been whipped. I never remember having felt the least bit bitterly toward mamma for punishing me. I always felt I had deserved my punishment, and was much happier for having received it. For after mamma had punished us and shown her displeasure, she showed no signs of further displeasure, but acted as if we had not displeased her in any way. Ordinary punishments answered very well for Susy. She was a thinker, and would reason out the purpose of them, apply the lesson, and achieve the reform required. But it was much less easy to devise punishments that would reform Clara. This was because she was a philosopher who was always turning her attention to finding something good and satisfactory and entertaining in everything that came her way; consequently it was sometimes pretty discouraging to the troubled mother to find that after all her pains and thought in inventing what she meant to be a severe and reform-compelling punishment, the child had had not in had had entirely missed the severities, severities, severities, severities through through in through through her native disposition to get interest and pleasure out of them as novelties. The mother, in her anxiety to find a penalty that would take sharp hold and do its work effectively, at last resorted, with a sore heart, and with a reproachful conscience, to that punishment which the incorrigible criminal in the penitentiary dreads above all the other punitive miseries which the warden inflicts upon him for his good—solitary confinement in the dark chamber. The grieved and worried mother shut Clara up in a very small clothes-closet and went away and left her there— there— there,— there— for fifteen minutes—it was all that the mother-heart that the mother-heart sthe that the mother-heart she that the mother-heart that the mother-heart could endure. Then she came softly back and listened—listened for the sobs, but there weren’t any; there were muffled and inarticulate sounds, but they could not be construed into sobs. The mother waited half an hour longer; by that time she was suffering so intensely with sorrow and compassion for the little prisoner that she was not able to wait any longer for the distressed sounds which she had counted upon to inform her when there had been punishment enough enough enough, enough, enough and the reform accomplished. She opened the closet to set the prisoner free and take her back into her loving favor and forgiveness, but the result was not the one expected. The captive had manufactured a fairy cavern out of the closet, and friendly fairies out of the clothes hanging from the hooks, and was having a most sinful and unrepentant good time, and requested permission to spend the rest of the day there! there! there.! period mended to an exclamation point there! From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. of me. From Susy’s Biography of me. SLC revised and then canceled ‘From Susy’s Biography. of me.’; Munro rewrote and underscored the title From Susy’s Biography of Me. But Mamma’s oppinions and ideas upon the subject of bringing up children has always been more or less of a joke in our family, perticularly since Papa’s article in the “Christian Union,” and I am sure Clara and I have related the history of our old family paper-cutter, our punishments and privations with rather more pride and triumph than any other sentiment, because of Mamma’s way of rearing us. When the article “What ought he to have done?” came out Mamma read it, and was very much interested in it. And when papa heard that she had read it he went to work and secretly wrote his opinion of what the father ought to have done. He told Aunt Susy, Susy, Susy Susy, Susy, Clara and I, about it but mamma was not to see it or hear any thing about it till it came out. He gave it to Aunt Susy to read, and after Clara and I had gone up to get ready for bed he brought it up for us to read. He told what he thought the father ought to have done by telling what mamma would have done. The article was a beautiful tribute to mamma and every word in it true. But still in writing about mamma he partly forgot that the article was going to be published, I think, and expressed himself more fully than he would do the second time he wrote it; I think the article has done and will do a great deal of good, and I think it would have been perfect for the family and friend’s enjoyment, but a little bit too private to have been published as it was. And Papa felt so too, because the very next day or a few days after, he went down to New York to see if he couldn’t get it back before it was published but it was too late, and he had to return without it. When the Christian Union reached the farm and papa’s article in it all ready and waiting to be read to mamma papa hadn’t the courage to show it to her (for he knew she wouldn’t like it at all) at first, and he didn’t but he might have let it go and never let her see it, but finally he gave his consent to her seeing it, and told Clara and I we could take it to her, which we did, with tardiness, and we all stood around mamma while she read it, all wondering what she would say and think about it. She was too much surprised, (and pleased privately, too) to say much at first, but as we all expected publicly, (or rather when she remembered that this article was to be read by every one that took the Christian Union) she was rather shocked and a little displeased. Clara and I had great fun the night papa gave it to us to read and then hide, so mamma couldn’t see it, for just as we were in the midst of reading it mamma appeared papa following anxiously and asked why we were not in bed? then a scuffle ensued for we told her it was a secret and tried to hide it; but she chased us wherever we went, till she thought it was time for us to go to bed, then she surendered and left us to tuck it under Clara’s matress. A little A little A little . . . while after the article article article article foonote: *A certain article of mine, of that bygone time. M.T. SLC added the footnote with no callout in the text, presumably as part of his plan to drop the preceding four paragraphs in NAR; he canceled the footnote when he abandoned the plan. This is the first mention of the article where the text was supposed to resume, and the most likely place to place the footnote. was published letters began to come in to papa crittisizing it, there were some very pleasant ones but a few very disagreable. One of these, the very worst, mamma got hold of and read, to papa’s great regret, it was full of the most disagreble things, and so very enoying to papa that he for a time felt he must do something to show the author of it his great displeasure at being so insulted. But he finally decided not to, because he felt the man had some cause for feeling enoyed at, for papa had spoken of him, (he was the baby’s father) rather slightingly in his Christian Union Article. After all this, papa and mamma both wished I think they might never hear or be spoken to on the subject of the Christian Union article, and whenever any has spoken to me and told me “How much they did enjoy my father’s article in the Christian Christian Christain Christian Union” I almost laughed in their faces when I remembered what a great variety of oppinions had been expressed upon the subject of the Christian Union article of papa’s. The article was written in July or August and just the other day papa received quite a bright letter from a gentleman who has read the C.U. article and gave his opinion of it in these words. It is missing. She probably put the letter between the leaves of the Biography and it got lost out. She threw away the hostile letters, but tried to keep the pleasantest one for her book; surely there has been no kindlier biographer than this one. Yet to a quite creditable degree she is loyal to the responsibilities of her position as historian— historian— historian,— historian— not eulogist— eulogist— eulogist,— eulogist— and honorably gives me a quiet prod now and then. But how many, many, many she has withheld that I I were were I I deserved! I could prize them now; them now; them; them; now; them now; there would be no acid in her words, and and but but and and it is loss to me that she did not set them all down. Oh, Susy, you sweet little biographer, you break my old heart with your gentle charities! Oh, Susy . . . gentle charities! not in Oh, Susy . . . gentle charities! Oh, Susy . . . gentle charities! I think a great deal of her work. Her canvases are on their easels, and her brush flies about in a care-free care-free care-free care-free and random way, delivering a dash here, a dash there and another another another one another one another yonder, and one might suppose that there would be no definite result; on the contrary I think that an intelligent reader of her little book must find that by the time he has finished it he has somehow accumulated a pretty clear and nicely shaded idea of the several members of this family—including Susy herself—and that the random dashes on the canvases have developed into portraits. I feel that my own portrait, with some of the defects fined down and others left out, is here; and I am sure that any who knew the mother will recognize her without difficulty, and will say that the lines are drawn with a just judgment and a sure hand. Little creature though Susy Susy she Susy she Susy Susy was, the penetration which was born in her finds its way to the surface more than once in these pages. Before Susy began the Biography she let fall a remark now and then concerning my character which showed that she had it under observation. In the Record Record record rRecord Record which we kept of the children’s sayings there is an instance of this. She was twelve years old at the time. We had established a rule that each member of the family must bring a fact to breakfast—a fact drawn from a book or from any other source; any fact would answer. Susy’s first contribution was in substance as follows. Two great exiles and former opponents in war met in Ephesus—Scipio and Hannibal. Scipio asked Hannibal to name the greatest general the world had produced. “Alexander”—and he explained why. “And the next greatest?” “Pyrrhus”—and he explained why. “But where do you place yourself, then?” “If I had conquered you I would place myself before the others.” Susy’s grave comment was— “That attracted me, it was just like papa—he is so frank about his books.” So frank in admiring them, she meant. so frank . . . she meant. so frank . . . she meant. typed at the top of page 1541 so frank . . . she meant. so frank . . . she meant. deleted at the top of p. 1541 and recopied at the bottom of page 1540 to accommodate the insertion of the AD of 28 March 1907 so frank . . . she meant. March 14th, ’86. Mr. no ¶ March 14th, ’86. [¶] Mr. no ¶ March 14th, ’86. [¶] Mr. From Susy’s Biography of Me. From the Biography no ¶ March 14th, ’86.— Mr. ‘From . . . Me.’ inserted and canceled by SLC; ‘From the Biography’ inserted by Munro, dash added, and [¶] ‘Mr.’ marked to run on From the Biography. [¶] March 14th, ’86.—Mr. Laurence Barrette and Mr. and Mrs. Hutton were here a little while ago, and we had a very interesting visit from them. Papa said Mr. Barette never had acted so well before when he had seen him, as he did the first night he was staying with us. And Mrs. ——— said she never had seen an actor on the stage, whom she more wanted to speak with. Papa has been very much interested of late, in the “Mind Cure” theory. And in fact so have we all. A young lady in town has worked wonders, by using the “Mind Cure” upon people; she is constantly busy now curing peoples deseases in this way—and curing her own even, which to me seems the most remarkable of all. A little while past, papa was delighted with the knowledge of what he thought the best way of curing a cold, which was by starving it. This starving did work beautifully, and freed him from a great many severe colds. Now he says it wasn’t the starving that helped his colds, but the trust in the starving, the mind cure connected with the starving. I shouldn’t wonder if we finally became firm believers in Mind Cure. The next time papa has a cold, I haven’t a doubt, he will send for Miss Holden Miss Holden “Miss Holden” “Miss Holden” Miss H—— the young lady who is doctoring in the “Mind Cure” theory, to cure him of it. Mamma was over at Mrs. George Warners to lunch the other day, and Miss Holden Holden Holden Holden H—— was there too. Mamma asked if anything as natural as near-sightedness near-sightedness near-sightedness near sightedness could be cured she said oh yes just as well as other deseases. When mamma came home, she took me into her room, and told me that perhaps my near-sightedness could be cured by the “Mind Cure” and that she was going to have me try the treatment any way, there could be no harm in it, and there might be great good. If her plan succeeds there certainly will be a great deal in “Mind Cure” to my oppinion, for I am very near sighted and so is mamma, and I never expected there could be any more cure for it than for blindness, but now I dont know but what theres a cure for that. It was a disappointment; her nearsightedness nearsightedness near-sightedness remained with her always. She was born with it, no doubt; yet, strangely enough enough enough enough, enough, she must have been four years old, and possibly five, before we knew of its existence. It is not easy to understand how that could have happened. I discovered the defect by accident. I was half way half way half-way up the hall stairs one day at home, and was leading her by the hand, when I glanced back through the open door of the dining room dining room dining-room and saw what I thought she would recognize as a pretty picture. It was “Stray Kit,” the slender, the graceful, the sociable, the beautiful, the incomparable, the cat of cats, the tortoise-shell, curled up as round as a wheel and sound asleep on the fire-red cover of the dining table dining table dining table dining-table , with a brilliant stream of sunlight falling across her. I exclaimed about it, but Susy said she could see nothing there, neither cat nor table-cloth. The distance was so slight—not more than twenty feet, perhaps—that if it had been any other child I should not have credited the statement. statement. statement. statement. From the Biography. statement. From the Biography. March 14th, ’86. Clara no ¶ March 14th, ’86. [¶] Clara no ¶ March 14th, ’86. [¶] Clara no ¶ March 14th, ’86.—Clara ‘[¶] Clara’ marked to run on [¶] March 14th, ’86.—Clara sprained her ankle, a little while ago, by running into a tree, when coasting, and while she was unable to walk with it she played solotaire with cards a great deal. While Clara was sick and papa saw her play solotaire so much, he got very much interested in the game, and finally began to play it himself a little, then Jean took it up, and at last mamma, mamma, mamma, mamma, even played it ocasionally; Jean’s and papa’s love for it rapidly increased, and now Jean brings the cards every night to the table and papa and mamma help her play, and before dinner is at an end, papa has gotten a separate pack of cards, and is playing alone, with great interest. Mamma and Clara next are made subject to the contagious solatair, and there are four solotarireans solotarireans solotarireans solotaireans at the table; while you hear nothing but “Fill up the place” etc. It is dreadful! after supper Clara goes into the library, and gets a little red mahogany table, and placing it under the gas fixture seats herself and begins to play again, then papa follows with another table of the same discription, and they play solatair till bed-time. We have just had our Prince and Pauper pictures taken; two groups and some little single ones. The groups (the Interview and Lady Jane Grey scene) were pretty good, the lady Jane scene was perfect, just as pretty as it could be, the Interview was not so good; and two of the little single pictures were very good indeed, but one was very bad. Yet on the whole we think they were a success. Papa has done a great deal in his life I think, that is good, and very remarkable, but I think if he had had the advantages with which he could have developed the gifts which he has made no use of in writing his books, or in any other way for other peoples pleasure and benefit outside of his own family and intimate friends, he could have done more than he has and a great deal more even. He is known to the public as a humorist, but he has much more in him that is earnest than that is humorous. He has a keen sense of the ludicrous, notices funny stories and incidents knows how to tell them, to improve upon them, and does not forget them. He has been through a great many of the funny adventures related in “Tom Sayer” and in “Huckleberry Finn,” himself and he lived among just such boys, and in just such villages all the days of his early life. His “Prince and Pauper is his most orriginal, and best production; it shows the most of any of his books what kind of pictures are in his mind, usually. Not that the pictures of England in the 16th Century and the adventures of a little prince and pauper are the kind of things he mainly thinks about; but that that book, and those pictures represent the train of thought and imagination he would be likely to be thinking of to-day, to-morrow, or next day, more nearly than those given in “Tom Sawyer or “Huckleberry Finn.”It is so yet. M.T. Finn.”* footnote: *It is so yet. M.T. Finn.” [¶] It is so yet. M.T. Finn.”* (1) footnote: footnote. (1) *It is so yet. M.T. the footnote was given a secondary number ‘(1)’ because it was the first of two on the same page Finn.”* footnote: *It is so yet.—M.T. Papa can make exceedingly bright jokes, and he enjoys funny things, and when he is with people he jokes and laughs a great deal, but still he is more interested in earnest books and earnest subjects to talk upon, than in humorous ones.She has said it well and correctly. Humor is a subject which has never had much interest for me. This is why I have never examined it, nor written about it nor used it as a topic for a speech. A hundred times it has been offered me as a topic in these past forty years, but in no case has it attracted me. M.T. ones.* footnote: *She has . . . me. M.T. ones. ones.* (2) footnote: (2) *She has . . . me. M.T. the footnote was given a secondary number ‘(2)’ because it was the second of two on the same page ones.† footnote: †She has . . . me.—M.T. When we are all alone at home, nine times out of ten, he talks about some very earnest subject, (with an ocasional joke thrown in) and he a good deal more often talks upon such subjects than upon the other kind. He is as much of a Pholosopher as anything I think. I think he could have done a great deal in this direction if he had studied while young, for he seems to enjoy reasoning out things, no matter what; in a great many such directions he has greater ability than in the gifts which have made him famous. Thus at fourteen she had had hasd had made up her mind about me, and in no timorous or uncertain terms had had hadsd had had set down her reasons for her opinion. Fifteen years were to pass before any other critic—except Mr. Howells, I think—was to re-utter that daring opinion and print it. Right or wrong it was a brave position for that little analyzer analyzer analyser analyzer to take. She never withdrew it afterward, nor modified it. She has spoken of herself as lacking physical courage, and has evinced her admiration of Clara’s; but she had moral courage, which is the rarest of human qualities, and she kept it functionable by exercising it. I think that in questions of morals and politics she was usually on my side; but when she was not she had her reasons and maintained her ground. Two years after she passed out of my life I wrote a philosophy philosophy Philosophy . Of the three persons who have seen the manuscript only one understood it, and all three condemned it. If she could have read it, she also would have condemned it, possibly,—probably, in fact—but she would have understood it. It would have had no difficulties for her on that score; also she would have found a tireless pleasure in analyzing analyzing analysing analyzing and discussing its problems. March 23, ’86. The no ¶ March 23, ’86. [¶] The no ¶ March 23, ’86. [¶] The March 23, ’86. The ‘March 23,’ underscored and marked to precede ‘The’ at 333.2 Chapters from My Autobiography.—XIX. By Mark Twain Insert Prefatory Note centered: From Susy’s Biography of Me. [¶] March 23, ’86.—The CHAPTERS FROM MY AUTOBIOGRAPHY—XIX by mark twain. standard prefatory note From Susy’s Biography of Me. [¶] March 23, ’86.—The other day was my birthday, and I had a little birthday party in the evening and papa acted some very funny charades with Mr. Gherhardt, Mr. Jesse Grant (who had come up from New York and was spending the evening with us) and Mr. Frank Warner. One of them was “on his knees” honys-sneeze. There were a good many other funny ones, all of which I dont remember. Mr. Grant was very pleasant, and began playing the charades in the most delightful way. Susy’s spelling has defeated me, this time. I cannot make out what “honys sneeze” stands for. Impromptu charades were almost a nightly pastime of ours, from the children’s earliest days—they played in them with me when they were only five or six years old. As they increased in years and practice their love for the sport almost amounted to a passion, and they acted their parts with a steadily increasing ability. At first they required much drilling; but later they were generally ready as soon as the parts were assigned, and they acted them according to their own devices. Their stage-facility stage-facility stage-facility stage facility and absence of constraint and self-consciousness in the “Prince and Pauper” was a result of their charading practice. At ten and twelve Susy wrote plays, and she and Daisy Warner and Clara played them in the library or up stairs up stairs up stairs up-stairs in the schoolroom schoolroom school-room school-room , with only themselves and the servants for audience. They were of a tragic and tremendous sort, and were performed with great energy and earnestness. They were dramatized (freely) from English history, and in them Mary Queen of Scots and Elizabeth had few holidays. The clothes were borrowed from the mother’s wardrobe and the gowns were longer than necessary, but that was not regarded as a defect. In one of these plays Jean (three years old, perhaps) perhaps) perhaps), perhaps), perhaps) was Sir Francis Bacon. She was not dressed for the part, and did not have to say anything, but sat silent and decorous at a tiny table and was kept busy signing death-warrants. It was a really important office, for few entered those plays and and ansd and got out of them alive. March 26. no ¶ March 26. no ¶ March 26. [¶] March 26.— Mamma and Papa have been in New York for two or three days, and Miss Corey has been staying with us. They are coming home to-day at two o’clock. Papa has just begun to play chess, and he is very fond of it, so he has engaged to play with Mrs. Charles Warner every morning from 10 to 12, he came down to supper last night, full of this pleasant prospect, but evidently with something on his mind. Finally he said to mamma in an appologetical tone, Susy Warner and I have a plan. “Well” mamma said “what now, I wonder?” Papa said that Susy Warner Susy Warner “Susy Warner” Susy Warner and he were going to name the chess men after some of the old bible heroes, and then play chess on Sunday. April 18, ’86. Mamma no ¶ April 18, ’86. [¶] Mamma no ¶ April 18, ’86. [¶] Mamma [¶] April 18, ’86.—Mamma and papa Clara and Daisy have gone to New York to see the “Mikado.” They are coming home to-night at half past seven. Last winter when Mr. Cable was lecturing with papa, he wrote this letter to him just before he came to visit us. Everett House New York Jan. 21/84. Everett House New York Jan 21/84. Everett House New York Jan 21/84. Everett House New York Jan 21/84. not in Dear Uncle, That’s no ¶ Dear Uncle, [¶] That’s no ¶ Dear Uncle, [¶] That’s [¶] Dear Uncle,—That’s one nice thing about me, I never bother any one, to offer me a good thing twice. You dont ask me to stay over Sunday, but then you dont ask me to leave Saturday night, and knowing the nobility of your nature as I do—thank you, I’ll stay till Monday morning.Cable never traveled Sundays.—M.T., Dec. 22, 1906. morning.* footnote: *Cable never traveled Sundays.—M.T., Dec. 22, 1906. morning. Note. Cable never traveled Sundays. —M.T., Dec. 22, 1906. morning.* footNote. *Cable never traveled Sundays. —M.T., Dec. 22, 1906. insertions by SLC; cancellation by Munro morning.* footnote: *Cable never travelled Sundays. Your’s and the dear familie’s George W. Cable. It It It Dec. 22, 1906 It [December 22, 1906.] It seems a prodigious while ago! Two or three nights ago I dined at Andrew Carnegie’s Andrew Carnegie’s Andrew Carnegie’s Andrew Carnegie’s a friend’s house a friend’s house with a score of other men, and at my side was Cable—actually actually actually actually almost actually almost an old man, really really really really almost really almost an old man, that once so young chap! chap! chap:! period mended to an exclamation point chap! Sixty-two Sixty-two 62 years old, frost on his head, seven grandchildren in stock, and a brand-new wife to re-begin life with! with! with. with. ! period mended to an exclamation point with!