5 January 1909 Dictated at Stormfield, January 5, 1909 I Dictated at Stormfield, January 5, 1909 [¶] I Dictated at Stormfield, Jan. 5, 1909. I saw only three references to that curious Presidential performance of two or three weeks ago—the one where the Chief Magistrate treated a young girl harshly. One of these was in the New York Times Times Times . The substance of it, as I remember it, was to this effect. An article or an editorial in the Sun Sun Sun charged Mr. Roosevelt—who was out riding in the country, with friends—with striking, with his “crop,” the horse of a young girl who violated etiquette by riding past him. It was further charged that that that the Mr. Roosevelt sternly rebuked the girl, besides, for her lack of manners. Continuing, the Times Times Times added some elephantine attempts at sarcasm, to the effect that the girl and her father were arrested and sent to a military dungeon to be tried by court martial, etc. I could make nothing out of the thing. I could not make out whether anything at all had happened or not. There seemed to have been a Rooseveltian incident, but the size and style of it were hopelessly obscured by the Times’s Times’s Times’s unhappy attack of clumsy and idiotic satirics. But we have a visitor, to-day, who furnishes what he claims to be the facts. He got them from a friend of the girl’s father. To wit To wit To-wit . The President, with three friends, was out in the country taking a horseback ride. Presently a girl of fifteen appeared in the rear—on horseback. She closed the interval, and was intending to ride by, when she recognized recognized recognised the President President P President by his shoulders, or perhaps his ears, shoulders, or perhaps his ears, back shoulders, or perhaps his ears, and slackened her pace and fell back a few paces. After a little, the Head of the Greatest Nation on Earth whirled about and charged rearward and exclaimed to the child— “Don’t you know who I am? You have followed me long enough enough enogh . Where are your manners?” The frightened girl explained. “I was in a hurry, and was going to ride by, but when I saw it was the President, I—” “Never mind about that! Yonder’s Yonder’s There’s Yonder’s a side-road—take it. Go!” The girl burst into sobbings and said— “It is the road to my father’s house, sir. I was going to take it as soon as—” “Go—will you!” Which she did. The father wrote a note to the President complaining, but got no reply. Have we ever had a President before of whom such a story could be told and find believers? Certainly not. It would be recognized as a foolish and extravagant invention, a manifest lie; for we have never had a President before who was destitute of self-respect and of respect for his high office; we have had no President before who was not a gentleman; we have had no President before who was intended for a butcher, a dive-keeper or a bully, and missed his mission by compulsion of circumstances over which he had no control. Will the story be believed now? Yes, and justifiably. No one who knows Mr. Roosevelt will doubt that in its essence the tale is true. This is the same ruffian whose subordinate ruffian brutally treated a lady in the waiting-room of of three of the White House three years ago, and was rewarded for it by being appointed postmaster of Washington.