27 April 1908 Dictated April 27, 1908 Extract from District-Attorney Jerome’s recent speech in which he declares that a democratic government won’t work as long as we have government by the newspapers—Mr. Clemens comments upon this speech and upon the evil influence of the daily papers. District-Attorney Jerome has been telling some straight truths at a banquet the other night. The newspaper report says: Mr. Jerome was cheered when he arose and began by praising the British Ambassador, Mr. Bryce. He then said that Americans expected that their humor would tide them over the rough places. “Nothing can be done,” said Mr. Jerome, “if you men will not take more interest in public life. You take this great State of New York and turn it over to Pat. McCarren, Charley Murphy, Fingy Conners and Packy McCabe and then you sit down. I say God bless the Irish and I am glad you haven’t conquered them. Still I don’t want to see the State run by those four Irishmen.” The District Attorney then took another tack. “I tell you,” declared Mr. Jerome, “a democratic government won’t work as long as you have government by the newspapers. No other form of government devised by the mind of man requires so much care from its citizens (meaning democratic government). You cannot make things right by statutes, you can only make them work by men. Men may say they don’t care for approbation, but the man who tells you that is a fool and a liar. “He tells you that he doesn’t care for approbation and he lies and he is a fool if he thinks you will believe it. A democratic form of government should be based on universal suffrage, but it is now based on public opinion. What makes it so is that you men of education have not done your duty. You read the headlines in the newspapers and it makes no impression upon you. You read them again—the same headlines—for a few weeks and then you have a decided opinion without a single fact to substantiate it. I tell you a democratic government won’t work as long as we have government by the newspapers. “Here, only recently, the head of a great financial institution killed himself. He made what atonement he could, and then a great journal spread before the public his private life. He had two lovely daughters growing up. Did it concern the public in any way to read the story of his personal wrongdoing that was blazoned before the world? Did it make it more possible for us to work out our own institutions? institutions? institutions? | centered Cities Another Instance. institutions? “It was done for what? It was for cash. And yet we read it and take in every detail that was spread before us. A large advertiser in Philadelphia guilty of a crime committed suicide here. Not a paper in Philadelphia chronicled it. A great and enterprising newspaper of New York owned by a great and enterprising citizen sent a special edition to Philadelphia with the fearful story blazing forth to wreck that home. “Another instance—a prominent man in this city was shot dead in a department store. Not a paper in the city said where it was done. If I want a paper controlled where do I go?” Mr. Jerome here mentioned the names of a number of large department stores of the city. “The leading publications of this city are dictated to by the counting-rooms,” continued the District-Attorney. “One of our great papers investigated ice. One of its men went up to Maine and looked around, and then he returned and went to the President of the company and said to him: ‘I have got an option on a little ice; don’t you want to buy it.’ That was in in in in in 1906, when ice was scarce, and they might have been glad to get it. “At any rate they put a price on that ice that netted the young man $5,000. These papers lead us by the glamor of their headlines and they trail into the dust the good name of a public officer trying to do his sworn duty—and they do it for personal reasons. reasons. reasons.” reasons. “I recently sat next to a great critic at a musical performance. I am not much of a musician, but I can sing. This great critic told me that his criticisms were blue pencilled in the office because of the advertising end of the paper. paper. paper. centered Some One Called Him Thief. paper. “What do the libel laws of to-day amount to? I was called a thief, in so many words. For two years I have been trying to get that up in a suit. When the Public Service bill was up in Albany I found that hardly a man had given any consideration to that bill. They said they voted as they did for fear of the newspapers. The same was true of the Eighty Cent Gas bill—they were afraid of the papers. This passing of legislation under the whip is wrong. Maybe the judgment of a newspaper man is better than anybody else’s, and if that is true the remedy is to send the editor to the Legislature.” What we call our civilization is steadily deteriorating, I think. We were a pretty clean people before the war; we seem to be rotten at the heart now. The newspapers are mainly responsible for this. They publish every loathsome thing they can get hold of, and if the simple facts are not odious enough they exaggerate them. There are twenty-five hundred daily newspapers in the country, and I know of only six whose conduct is not in accordance with what Jerome has said about them and with what I have just said concerning them. Jay Gould made commercial dishonesty a fashion, and respectable; all the attempts made to check the spread of the decay which he started have failed. Our newspaper is a singular product. Its editorial page is morally clean; its ideals are high and fine, and its advocacy of them is able, eloquent, and convincing; then along with it, every day, we have seven pages of poisonous dirt in the form of news. Our newspaper is a kind of temple, with one angel in it and seven devils. The nation has become fond of the seven devils, and is feverishly interested, hungrily interested, in all they may have to say; but it is only the select few that listen to the angel. The seven devils wield a prodigious influence; they wield seven-eighths of the influence exercised by the nation’s newspapers, and it is a damaging influence. The good accomplished by the other eighth certainly has a value, but it is the value of one to seven. We are hearing from the Gould family again. Their doings constitute our court-circular court-circular court circular . I take the following synopsis from a newspaper of last week: SORROWS OF CUPID IN GOULD FAMILY. Howard Gould. Married Katherine Clemmons, an actress, in October, 1898. Sued by her for a separation in May, 1907, and alimony based on an income of $1,000,000 a year, alleging cruelty and inhuman treatment. His answer a charge that she was too friendly with “Buffalo Bill” and later with Dustin Farnum. Awaiting further disclosures and trial. Anna Gould. Married Count Boni de Castellane in March, 1895. He squandered a large part of her fortune and after and after anda fter and after a few years there were reports of trouble between them. She sued him for an absolute divorce, naming many correspondents, and was freed from one Count only to wed another, if Count Helie de Sagan’s prediction and hopes are fulfilled. Frank Gould. Married Helen Margaret Kelly, daughter of the late Edward Kelly, in December, 1901. A love match which was soon broken by quarrels and finally culminated in a suit for a limited divorce and the angry separation of the couple. Anna Gould remains in Europe. Yesterday’s court-circular court-circular court circular announces that she is in Naples, with that fragrant prince, and is going to marry him. She says she prefers Europe as a residence because it is only in Europe that Americans of the best class can find those refinements which make existence tolerable to that kind of Americans. That we should live to hear a Gould talk refinement and admire it! it! it! (Lord Dundreary)