18 October 1907 Dictated October October Oct. 18, 1907 First Marconigrams sent across the Atlantic yesterday—President comes within three three 3 miles of flushing a bear—Mr. Clemens mentions the great comet of 1858, the year in which the first cablegram was sent. I believe I have now arrived at that occasion in Vienna already spoken of when, by accident, I learned how to read on the platform without previous preparation—a most valuable discovery! As I recall it now—never mind it, let it go for the present; this morning’s news possesses a larger and more immediate interest: First Marconigrams Sent Across Atlantic to The World. London (via Marconi wireless via Glace Bay, N. S.), Oct. 17, 1907. To the New York World: Greetings to the Americans through the New York World in the words of Burns: Man to man the world o’er Shall brithers be for a’ a’ a’ ay’ that. (Lord) LOREBURN LOREBURN LONSDALE LOREBURN , Lord High Chancellor of England. London (via Marconi wireless via Glace Bay, N. S.), Oct. 17, 1907. To the New York World: Greater miracles than those of old bewilder us to-day. (Andrew) CARNEGIE. London (via Marconi wireless via Glace Bay, N. S.), Oct. 17, 1907. To the New York World: I earnestly trust that this marvellous discovery may tend to enrich the mutual affection and confidence between the two great branches of the English-speaking race. race. race race. (Ven. William Macdonald) SINCLAIR,Archdeacon of London and Chairman of the Pilgrims’ Committee. Two colossal historical incidents had place yesterday; incidents which must go echoing down the corridors of time for ages; incidents which can never be forgotten while histories shall continue to be written. Yesterday, for the first time, business was opened to commerce by the Marconi Company, and wireless messages sent entirely across the Atlantic, straight from shore to shore; and on that same day the President of the United States for the fourteenth time came within three miles of flushing a bear. As usual, he was far away, nobody knew where, when the bear burst upon the multitude of dogs and hunters, and equerries, and chamberlains in waiting, and sutlers, and cooks, and scullions, and Rough Riders, and infantry and artillery, and had his customary swim to the other side of a pond and disappeared in the woods. While half the multitude watched the place where he vanished, the other half galloped off, with horns blowing, to scour the State of Louisiana in search of the great hunter. Why don’t don’t didn’t don’t they stop hunting the bear altogether, altogether, altogether, and hunt the President? He is the only one of the pair that can’t be found when he is wanted. By and by the President was found and laid upon the track, and he and the dogs followed it several miles through the woods, then gave it up, because Rev. Dr. Long, the “nature fakir,” “nature fakir,” “nature fakir,” came along and explained that it was a cow track. This is a sorrowful ending to a mighty enterprise. His Excellency leaves for Washington to-day, to interest himself further in his scheme of provoking a war with Japan with his battleships battleships battle-ships . Many wise people contend that his idea, on the contrary, is to compel peace with Japan, but I think he wants a war. He was in a skirmish once at San Juan Hill, and he got so much moonshine glory out of it that he has never been able to stop talking about it since. I remember that at a small luncheon party of men at Brander Matthews’s house, once, he dragged San Juan Hill in three or four times, in spite of all attempts of the judicious to abolish the subject and introduce an interesting one in its place. I think the President is clearly insane in several ways, and insanest upon war and its supreme glories. I think he longs for a big war wherein he can spectacularly perform as chief general and chief admiral, and go down to history as the only monarch of modern times that has served both offices at the same time. Yesterday Marconi’s stations on the two sides of the Atlantic exchanged messages aggregating five thousand words, at the rate of forty or fifty words per minute. It is a world event. I met Mr. Marconi in London seven years ago, in company with Sir Hiram Maxim; he was confident, at that time, that he would some day be able to send wireless telegrams across the ocean, without relays, but not many other persons shared this confidence with him. I am glad to have seen him and talked with him, and glad that I have seen and talked with Professor Morse, and Graham Bell, and Edison, and others among the men who have added the top story to the majestic edifice of the world’s modern material civilization. No fuss was made over the great event of yesterday, either in England or America; the time for that will come later, as was the case with Morse’s telegraph. I remember the wave of jubilation and astonishment that swept the planet in the summer of 1858 when the first electric message was sent across the Atlantic under the sea, by cable. It did not seem believable; it seemed altogether unbelievable, yet we had to believe it and go through the several stages of getting reconciled to it and adjusted to it; then, as usual in these vast matters, it presently became a commonplace. That was the year of the great comet—the most illustrious wanderer of the skies that has ever appeared in the heavens within the memory of men now living. living. living. period retraced It was a wonderful spray spray sheaf spray of white light, a light so powerful that I think it was able to cast shadows—however, necessarily it could could could ‘could’ underscored , there is no occasion to seek for evidence of that; there is sufficient evidence of it in the fact that one could read a newspaper by that light at any time in the night. I know this because I did it myself. I was a cub pilot cub pilot cub-pilot in those days, and had the glory and the splendor of that great companionship for my solace and delight on my lonely watch in the pilot-house pilot-house pilot-house during many and many a night. More than once I read a newspaper by the light that streamed from that stupendous explorer of the glittering archipelagoes of space. By and by Marconi, like Morse, will have his triumph. It was not my fortune to be present when Morse had his, but I remember the stir it made. Morse, clothed in stars and ribbons and crosses contributed in his honor by the chief scientific societies and sceptred sceptred sceptered rulers of the world, sat, old and bowed with age, upon the stage of the Academy of Music, in presence of several thousand persons, and worked the key himself and exchanged messages over land and under sea with monarchs and municipalities scattered far and wide around the rotundity of the globe. I missed that colossal event, but I hope to be present when it is repeated, with Marconi at the key.