30 January 1907 Wednesday, January 30, 1907 Decaying political and commercial morals of the United States United States U.S. —The press no longer the palladium of our liberties—Mr. Guggenheim chosen Senator Senator senator for Colorado by a bought legislature—The little unfinished tale of the Rev. Mr. X. who discovered a first-edition first-edition first edition Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakespeare —Mr. Clemens finishes the tale—And shows the difference between this man and the late Hammond Trumbull. The political and commercial morals of the United States are not merely food for laughter, they are an entire banquet. The human being is a curious and interesting invention. It takes a Cromwell Cromwell Cromwell, and some thousands of preaching and praying soldiers and parsons parsons parsons, ten years to raise the standards of English official and commercial morals to a respectworthy respectworthy respectworthy ‘respect worthy’ marked to close up altitude, but it takes only one Charles II II the Second a couple of years to pull them down into the mud again. Our standards were fairly high a generation ago, and they had been brought to that grade by some generations of wholesome labor on the part of the nation’s multitudinous teachers; but Jay Gould, all by himself, was able to undermine the structure in half a dozen years; and in thirty years his little band of successors—the Senator Clarks, and their kind—have been able to sodden it with decay from roof to cellar, and render it shaky beyond repair, apparently. Before Jay Gould’s time there was a fine phrase, a quite elegant phrase, that was on everybody’s lips, and everybody enjoyed repeating it, day and night, and everywhere, and of enjoying the thrill of it: “The press is the palladium of our liberties.” It was a serious saying, and it was a true saying, but it is long ago dead, and has been tucked safely away in the limbo of oblivion. No one would venture to utter it now except as a sarcasm. Mr. Guggenheim has lately been chosen United States Senator Senator senator by a bought legislature in Colorado—which is almost almost almost the customary way, now, of electing United States Senators Senators senators . Mr. Guggenheim has purchased his legislature and paid for it. By his public utterances, it is plain that the general political rottenness has entered into him and saturated him, and he is not aware that he has been guilty of even an indelicacy, let alone a gross crime. In many instances the In many instances the In many instances Tthe palladium of our liberties has nothing but compliment for him, and justification. The Denver Post, which is recognized as the principal and most trustworthy reflector of the public opinion of his State, says: It is true that Mr. Guggenheim spent a large sum of money, but he only followed the precedents set in many other States. There is nothing essentially wrong in what he has done. Mr. Guggenheim will make the best Senator Colorado has ever had. His election will result in bringing to Colorado what the State needs, capitalists and population of the desirable quality. Mr. Guggenheim will get for Colorado many improvements which Tom Patterson failed to obtain from Washington. He is just the man for the place. There is no use trying to reform the world. They have been trying that for two thousand years and haven’t succeeded. Mr. Guggenheim is the choice of the people and they ought to have him, even if he spent a million dollars. The issue of the election was Tom Patterson and Simon Guggenheim, and the people chose Guggenheim. The Denver Post bows to the will of the people. Mr. Guggenheim, Guggenheim, Guggenheim in buying what an obsolete phrase called senatorial “honors,” “honors,” “honors,” did not buy the entire legislature, but practised practised practiced the customary economy and bought only enough of it to elect him. This has been resented by some of the unbought; they offered a motion to inquire into the methods by which his election was achieved, but the bought majority not only voted the motion down but actually sponged it from the records sponged . . . records sponged . . . records. ‘sponged . . . records’ underscored . It looks like sensitiveness, but it probably isn’t; it is human nature, that even the most conscienceless thieves do not like to be pilloried in the Rogues’ Gallery. A Little Tale. It was told me the other night by one of the guests present at the service of praise given by the Union League Club in adulation of Senator Clark, the fragrant fragrant Ffragrant . He said: The Reverend Reverend Rev. Elliot B. X., X., X., of the City of XX, XX, XX, is an eager and passionate collector of rare books; by grace of his wife’s wealth, he is able to exploit his passion freely. Several years ago he was traveling through a sparsely settled farming country, and he stopped at a farm-house to rest, or feed, or something. It was a poor little humble place, but the farmer and his wife and their two little children seemed contented and happy. Presently the clergyman’s attention was attracted by a large book which in their play the little children were using as a stool. It seemed to be a family Bible. Mr. X. X. X was troubled to see the Scriptures used in such a way; also, the ancient aspect of the book inflamed his book-collecting lust, and he took up the volume and examined it. An earthquake of sudden joy shook him from dome to cellar—the book was a Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakespeare , first-edition first-edition first edition , and in good repair! As soon as he was able to compose himself, he asked the farmer where he got the book. The farmer said it had been in the possession of his people in New England no one knew how many years or generations, and that when he removed to the West to find a new home he brought the book along merely because it was a book; one doesn’t throw books away. Mr. X. X. X asked him if he would sell it. The farmer said “Yes,” that he would like to trade it for a book or two of some other character—books of a fresher interest than this one. Mr. X. X. X said he would take it home, then, and—— Somebody broke into the conversation at this point and it was not resumed. I went home thinking about the unfinished tale, and in bed I continued to think about it. It was an interesting situation, and I was sorry the interruption had occurred; then, as I was not sleepy, I thought I would finish the tale myself. I knew it would be easy to do, because such tales always move along a certain well defined course and they all fetch up at one and the same goal at the end. I must go back for a moment, for I have forgotten a detail. The book had furnished the clergyman not merely one joyful earthquake, but two, for in it he found what was manifestly Shakspeare’s Shakspeare’s Shakespeare’s autograph—a prodigious find, there being only two others known to be in existence on the planet! Along with Shakspeare’s Shakspeare’s Shakespeare’s name was another name—Ward Ward Warde . Without doubt this name would be a help in tracing the book’s pedigree and in establishing its authenticity. As I have said, it would be easy to furnish the tale, so I began to think it out. I thought it out to my satisfaction—as follows: My Version. Upon his arrival at home, the clergyman examined the latest quotations of the rare-book rare-book rare-book market and found that perfect copies of first-edition first-edition first-edition Shakspeares Shakspeares Shakespeares had advanced 5 per cent 5 per cent five per cent. since the autumn quotations of the previous year, therefore the farmer’s copy was worth $7,300; also, he found that the standing offer of $55,000 for an authentic autograph of Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakespeare had been advanced to $60,000. He returned humble and fervent thanks for the happy fortune which had thrown these treasures in his way, and he resolved to add them to his collection, and thus make that collection illustrious and establish its renown forever; so he sent his check for $67,300 $67,300 $67,200 to the farmer, whose astonishment and gratitude were beyond his ability to express in words. I was very well satisfied with my version, and not unproud of it; wherefore I was eager to get hold of the rest of the other version and see if I had fallen into any discrepancies. I hunted up the narrator, and he furnished me what I wanted, as follows: Conclusion of the First Version. The gigantic find proved to be genuine, and worth many thousands of dollars in the market; indeed the value of the autograph was quite beyond estimate in dollars, there being American multimillionaires multimillionaires multi-millionaires who would be glad to pay three-fourths of a year’s income for it. The generous clergyman did not forget the poor farmer, but sent him an encyclopedia encyclopedia encyclopaedia and eight hundred dollars eight hundred dollars $800 . Caesar’s ghost! Caesar’s ghost! Caesar’s ghost! I was disappointed, and said so. A discussion followed, in which several of us took part, I maintaining that the clergyman had not been generous to the farmer, but had taken advantage of his ignorance to rob him; the others insisted that the clergyman’s knowledge was a valuable acquisition which had been earned by study and diligence, and that he was entitled to all the profit he could get out of it—that there was no call for him to give away that valuable knowledge to a person who had been interesting himself in potatoes, and corn, and hogs, when he might have been devoting his leisure hours to acquiring the same knowledge which had turned out to be so valuable to the clergyman. I was not persuaded, but still insisted insisted urged insisted that the transaction was not fair to the farmer, and that he ought to have had half of the value of his book and the autograph book and the autograph book, and the autograph anyway. I believed I would have allowed him half, and I I I said so. I could not be sure of this, but I at least believed it. Privately I knew that in my first burst of emotion, if I had been in the clergyman’s place, I would have given the farmer the entire value; that when the burst of emotion had had time to modify, I would have reduced the farmer’s share by 10 10 ten per cent; that when the second burst had had time to cool off a little the farmer’s share would suffer another shrinkage; and if there should be still further extensions of time for cooling off, I thought it more than likely that I should end by sending the farmer the Cyclopedia Cyclopedia cyclopaedia and stopping there; there; there,; comma mended to a semicolon for this would be the way of the human race, and I am the human race compacted and crammed into a single suit of clothes, but quite able to represent its entire massed multitude in all its moods and inspirations. But there are exceptions; I am aware of that; I do not represent those exceptions, but only the massed generality of the race. The late Hammond Trumbull of Hartford was an exception. He was a very great scholar and a a a very fine human being. If he had used his vast knowledge commercially, he could have made himself rich out of it, but he didn’t; he never made a penny out of it at the expense of some other person’s ignorance; he was always ready to help the poor possessor of any rare and precious thing, out of his store of knowledge, and he did it gladly, and without charge. I remember an instance: twenty years after the war a lady wrote him from the South that among the flotsam and jetsam left unappropriated by the Union soldiers when they destroyed her father’s house house house, in the war time was a copy of the Eliot Eliot Elliot Indian Bible; that she had been told it was worth a hundred dollars; dollars; dollars; in fact she had been offered that for it; that she had also been told that Mr. Trumbull would know the book’s value, and would be able to advise her in the matter; matter; matter; that she hoped he would be able to advise her; that she was poor, and and and that the hundred dollars would be an important sum for her. Trumbull replied that if the volume was perfect perfect perfect, the British Museum would take it at its standing price, which was a thousand dollars. He asked the lady to send the book to him, which she did. It turned out to be a perfect copy, and he sent her the money, without rebate. money, without rebate. money., without rebate. I recall an instance of the other sort: a poverty-stricken sister, or other female relative of Audubon, Audubon, Audubon, possessed a copy, in perfect condition, condition, repair, condition, of Audubon’s great book, and she wished to sell it, for she was very poor. Among collectors it had an established price, which was a thousand dollars, but she did not know that. She offered it to a professor in a university, who did did did ‘did’ underscored know it, and he gave her a hundred dollars for it; and not only did he play this swindle upon her, but had no more wit wit wit, and no more heart heart heart, than to boast about it afterwards.