9 February 1906 Friday, February title February Feb. 9, 1906 The “strong language” episode in the bath-room—Susy’s Susy’s Susiey’s Susy’s reference to “The Prince and the Pauper”—The mother and the children help edit the books—Reference to ancestors. Susy’s Susy’s Susiey’s Susy’s remark about my strong language troubles me, and I must go back to it. All through the first ten years of my married life I kept a constant and discreet watch upon my tongue while in the house, and went outside and to a distance when circumstances were too much for me and I was obliged to seek relief. I prized my wife’s respect and approval above all the rest of the human race’s respect and approval. I dreaded the day when she should discover that I was but a whited sepulcher partly freighted with suppressed language. I was so careful, during ten years, that I had not a doubt that my suppressions had been successful. Therefore I was quite as happy in my guilt as I could have been if I had been innocent. But But textual note: On TS3, in the margin beside the paragraph beginning with this word, SLC wrote and boxed, and then canceled, ‘1880’ in red pencil. at last an accident exposed me. I went into the bath-room one one one∧ one morning to make my toilet, and carelessly left the door two or three inches ajar. It was the first time time time in ten years time that I had ever ever ever ever failed to take the precaution of closing it tightly. I knew the necessity of being particular about this, because shaving was always a trying ordeal for me, and I could seldom carry it through to a finish without verbal helps. Now this time I was unprotected, but but and and but but did not suspect it. I had no extraordinary trouble with my razor on this occasion, and was able to worry through with mere mutterings and growlings of an improper sort, but with nothing noisy or emphatic about them—no snapping and barking. Then I put on a shirt. My shirts are an invention of my own. They open in the back, and are buttoned there—when there are buttons. This time the button was missing. My temper jumped up several degrees in a moment, and my remarks rose accordingly, both in loudness and vigor of expression. But I was not troubled, for the bath-room door was a solid one and I supposed it was firmly closed. I flung up the window and threw the shirt out. It fell upon the shrubbery where the people on their way to church could admire it if they wanted to; there to; there to;. Tthere period mended to a semicolon to; there was merely fifty feet of grass between the shirt and the passer-by. Still rumbling and thundering distantly, I put on another shirt. Again the button was absent. I augmented my language to meet the emergency, and threw that shirt out of the window. I was too angry—too insane—to examine the third shirt, but put it furiously on. Again the button was absent, and that shirt followed its comrades out of the window. Then I straightened up, gathered my reserves, and let myself go like a cavalry charge. In the midst of that great assault, my eye fell upon that gaping door, and I was paralysed paralysed paralyzed . It took me a good while to finish my toilet. I extended the time unnecessarily in trying to make up my mind as to what I would best do in the circumstances. I tried to hope that Mrs. Clemens was asleep, but I knew better. I could not escape by the window. It was narrow, and suited only to shirts. At last I made up my mind to boldly loaf through the bedroom bedroom bed-room bedroom with the air of a person who had not been doing anything. I made half the journey successfully. I did not turn my eyes in her direction, because that would not be safe. It is very difficult to look as if you have not been doing anything when the facts are the other way, and my confidence in my performance oozed steadily out of me as I went along. I was aiming for the left-hand door because it was furthest from my wife. It had never been opened from the day that the house was built, but it seemed a blessed refuge for me now. The bed was this one, wherein I am lying now, and dictating these histories morning after morning with so much serenity. It was this same old elaborately carved black Venetian bedstead—the most comfortable bedstead that ever was, with space enough in it for a family, and carved angels enough surmounting its twisted columns and its headboard and footboard to bring peace to the sleepers, and pleasant dreams. I had to stop in the middle of the room. I hadn’t the strength to go on. I believed that I was under accusing eyes—that even the carved angels were inspecting me with an unfriendly gaze. You know how it is when you are convinced that somebody behind you is looking steadily at you. You have to turn your face—you can’t help it. I turned mine. The bed was placed as it is now, with the foot where the head ought to be. If it had been placed as it should have been, the high headboard would have sheltered me. But the footboard was no sufficient protection, for for and and for for I could be seen over it. I was exposed. I was wholly without protection. I turned, because I couldn’t couldn’t could n’t couldn’t help it—and my memory of what I saw is still vivid, after all these years. Against the white pillows I saw the black head—I saw that young and beautiful face; and I saw the gracious eyes with a something in them which I had never seen there before. They were snapping and flashing with indignation. I felt myself crumbling; I felt myself shrinking away to nothing under that accusing gaze. I stood silent under that desolating fire for as much as a minute, I should say—it seemed a very, very long time. Then my wife’s lips parted, and from them issued—my latest bath-room remark my . . . remark my . . . remark ‘my . . . remark’ underscored my . . . remark . The language perfect, but the expression velvety, velvety, not in velvety, velvety, unpractical, apprentice-like apprentice-like apprentice-like apprenticelike , ignorant, inexperienced, comically inadequate, absurdly weak and unsuited to the great language. In my lifetime I had never heard anything so out of tune, so inharmonious, so incongruous, so ill-suited to each other as were those mighty words set to that feeble music. I tried to keep from laughing, for I was a guilty person in deep need of charity and mercy. I tried to keep from bursting, and I succeeded—until she gravely said said said said, “There, now you know how it sounds.” Then Then Oh, then Oh, t Then Then I exploded; the air was filled with my fragments, and you could hear them whiz. exploded; the . . . whiz. exploded. exploded.; the . . . whiz whiz. ‘whiz’ rewritten for clarity exploded; the . . . whiz. I said said said said, said, “Oh Livy, if it sounds like that that that that ‘that’ underscored that God forgive me, God forgive me, God forgive me, God forgive me, not in I will never do it again! again! again. again.! again! ” Then she had to laugh herself. Both of us broke into convulsions, and went on laughing until we were physically exhausted and spiritually reconciled. physically exhausted and spiritually reconciled. exhausted. physically exhausted. and spiritually reconciled. physically exhausted and spiritually reconciled. The The At breakfast the children— t The The children were present at breakfast—Clara aged six and Susy Susy Susiey Susy eight—and the mother made a guarded remark about strong language; guarded because she did not wish the children to suspect anything—a guarded remark which censured strong language. Both children broke out in one voice with this comment, comment, comment, comment, “Why “Why “Why “Why, “Why, mamma, papa uses it. it. it. it.! it! ” I ¶ I no ¶ I ¶ I was astonished. I had supposed that that that that that secret was safe in my own breast, and that its presence had never been suspected. I asked, asked, asked asked, asked, “How ¶ “How no ¶ “How ¶ “How did you know, you little rascals?” “Oh,” they said, “we often listen over the ballusters ballusters ‘balleusters’ ballusters balusters when you are in the hall explaining things to George.” From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. ‘From Susy’s Biography.’ underscored; SLC added in the margin, ‘Put in that sub-head—always. SLC.’ From Susy’s Biography. One One “One “One One of papa’s latest books is “The “The “The ‘The Prince and the Pauper” Pauper” Pauper” Pauper’ and it is unquestionably the best book he has ever written, some people want him to keep to his old style, some gentleman wrote him, “I “I ‘I ‘“I single quotation mark mended to double “I enjoyed Huckleberry Finn immensely and am glad to see that you have returned to your old style.” style.” style.’ style.’ style.’” single quotation mark mended to double style.” That enoyed me that enoyed me greatly, because it trobles me me me” me” me (Susy (Susy (Susiey (Susy ([Susy [Susy was troubled by that word, and uncertain; she wrote a u u u ‘u’ underscored u above it in the proper place, but reconsidered the matter and struck it out) out) out) out)] out] to to “to “to to have so few people know papa, I mean realy know him, they think of Mark Twain as a humorist joking at everything; “And “And ‘And ‘“And single quotation mark mended to double “And with a mop of reddish brown hair which sorely needs the barbars brush a roman nose, short stubby mustache, a sad care-worn face, with maney crow’s feet” feet” feet’ feet’” single quotation mark mended to double feet” etc. That is the way people picture papa, I have wanted papa to write a book that would reveal something of his kind sympathetic nature, and “The “The “The ‘The Prince and the Pauper” Pauper” Pauper” Pauper’ partly does it. The book is full of lovely charming ideas, and oh the language! It is perfect. I think that one of the most touching scenes in it, is where the pauper is riding on horseback with his nobles in the “recognition procession” “recognition procession” “recognition procession” ‘“recognition procession’” single quotation marks mended to double “recognition procession” and he sees his mother oh and then what followed! How she runs to his side, when she sees him throw up his hand palm outward, and is rudely pushed off by one of the King’s officers, and then how the little pauper’s consceince consceince consceince conscience troubles him when he remembers the shameful words that were falling from his lips, when she was was was was was turned from his side “I “I ‘I ‘“I single quotation mark mended to double “I know you not woman” woman” woman’ woman’” single quotation mark mended to double woman” and how his grandeurs were stricken valueless, and his pride consumed to ashes. It is a wonderfully beautiful and touching little scene, and papa has described it so wonderfully. I never saw a man with so much variety of feeling as papa has; now the “Prince “Prince “Prince ‘Prince and the Pauper” Pauper” Pauper” Pauper’ is full of touching places, places, places, places; but there is most always a streak of humor in them somewhere. Now in the coronation—in the stirring coronation, just after the little king has got his crown back again papa brings that in about the Seal, where the pauper says he used the Seal “to “to ‘to ‘“to single quotation mark mended to double “to crack nuts with.” with.” with’. with.’ with.’” single quotation mark mended to double with.” Oh it is so funny and nice! Papa very seldom writes a passage without some humor in it somewhere, and I don’t think he ever will. will. will.” will.” will. The children always helped their mother to edit my books in manuscript. She would sit on the porch at the farm and read aloud, with her pencil in her hand, and the children would keep an alert and suspicious eye upon her right along, for the belief was well grounded in them that whenever she came across a particularly satisfactory passage she would strike it out. Their suspicions were well founded. The passages which were so satisfactory to them always had an element of strength in them which sorely needed modification or expurgation, expurgation, extinction, expurgation, expurgation, and was was was were always sure to get it at their mother’s hand. For my own entertainment, and to enjoy the protests of the children, I often abused my editor’s innocent confidence. I often interlarded remarks of a studied and felicitously atrocious character purposely to achieve the children’s brief delight, brief delight, delight brief delight, brief delight, and then then not in then then see the remorseless remorseless not in remorseless remorseless pencil do its fatal work. I often joined my supplications to the children’s, children’s, children’s, children’s for mercy, and strung the argument out and pretended to be in earnest. They were deceived, and so was their mother. It was three against one, and most unfair. But it was very delightful, and I could not resist the temptation. Now and then we gained the victory and there was much rejoicing. Then I privately struck the passage out myself. It had served its purpose. It had furnished three of us with good entertainment, and in being removed from the book by me it was only suffering the fate originally intended for it. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From the Biography. From the Biography. From the Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. Papa Papa “Papa “Papa Papa was born in Missouri. His mother is Grandma Clemens (Jane Lampton Clemens) of Kentucky. Grandpa Clemens was of the F.F. V’s of Virginia. Virginia. Virginia.” Virginia.” Virginia. Without doubt it was I that gave Susy Susy Susiey Susy that impression. I cannot imagine why, because I was never in my life much impressed by grandeurs which proceed from the accident of birth. I did not get this indifference from my mother. She was always strongly interested in the ancestry of the house. She traced her own line back to the Lambtons of Durham, England—a family which had been occupying broad lands there since Saxon times. I am not sure, but I think that those Lambtons got along without titles of nobility for eight or nine hundred years, then produced a great man, three-quarters of a century ago, and broke into the peerage. My mother knew all about the Clemenses of Virginia, and loved to aggrandize them to me, but she has long been dead. There has been no one to keep those details fresh in my memory, and they have grown dim. There was a Jere. Clemens who was a United States Senator Senator senator Senator , and in his day enjoyed the usual senatorial senatorial senatorial Senatorial fame—a fame which perishes whether it spring from four years’ years’ years years’ years’ service or forty. After Jere. Clemens’s fame as a Senator Senator senator Senator passed away, he was still remembered for many years on account of another service which he performed. He shot old John Brown’s Governor Wise in the hind leg in a duel. However, I am not very clear about this. It may be that Governor Wise shot him him him him ‘him’ underscored him in the hind leg. However, However, not in However, However, I don’t think it is important. I think that the only thing that is really important is that one of them got shot in the hind leg. It would have been better and nobler and more historical and satisfactory if both of them had got shot in the hind leg—but it is of of not in of of no use for me to try to recollect history, history, history. history., I never had a historical mind. Let it go. Whichever way it happened I am glad of it, and that is as much enthusiasm as I can get up for a person bearing my name. But I am forgetting the first first first first Clemens—the one that stands furthest back toward the really original first Clemens, which was Adam.