2 February 1906 Friday, February title February Feb. 2, 1906 Subject of February February Feb. 1st continued—The death of Susy Susy Susiey Susy Clemens— Ends with mention of Dr. John Brown. It explained that Susy Susy Susiey Susy was slightly ill—nothing of consequence. But we were disquieted, and began to cable for later news. This was Friday. All day no answer—and the ship to leave Southampton next day, at noon. Clara and her mother began packing, to be ready in case the news should be bad. Finally came a cablegram saying saying saying saying, “Wait for cablegram in the morning.” This was not satisfactory—not reassuring. I cabled again, asking that the answer be sent to Southampton, for the day was now closing. I waited in the postoffice postoffice Post-office Post-office post-office that night till the doors were closed, toward midnight, toward midnight, toward midnight, toward midnight, in the hope that good news might still come, but there was no message. We sat silent at home till one in the morning, morning, morning, morning, waiting—waiting for we knew not what. Then we took the earliest morning train, and when we reached Southampton the message was there. It said the recovery would be long, but certain. This was a great relief to me, but not to my wife. She was frightened. She and Clara went aboard the steamer at once and sailed for America, to nurse Susy Susy Susiey Susy . I remained behind to search for another and larger another and larger another and larger a larger house in Guildford. That was the 15th of August, 1896. Three days later, when my wife and Clara were 1896 1896 (1896) typed in the margin, deleted by Harvey (1896) typed in the margin not in about half way half way half way half-way across the ocean, I was standing in our dining room dining room dining-room thinking of nothing in particular, when a cablegram was put into my hand. It said said said said, “Susy Susy Susiey Susy was peacefully released to-day.” It is one of the mysteries of our nature that a man, all unprepared, can receive a thunder-stroke like that and live. There is but one reasonable explanation of it. The intellect is stunned by the shock shock shock shock, and but gropingly gathers the meaning of the words. The power to realize their full import is mercifully is mercifully is mercifully is, mercifully, wanting. The mind has a dumb sense of vast loss—that is all. It will take mind and memory months, and possibly years, to gather together the details details details details, and thus learn and know the whole extent of the loss. A man’s house burns down. The smoking wreckage represents only a ruined home that was dear through years of use and pleasant associations. By and by, as the days and weeks go on, first he misses this, then that, then the other thing. And when he casts about for it it it it, he finds that it was in that house. Always it is an essential—there was but one of its kind. It cannot be replaced. It was in that house. It is irrevocably lost. He did not realize that it was an essential when he had it; he only discovers it now when he finds himself balked, hampered, by its absence. It will be years before the tale of lost essentials is complete, and not till then can he truly know the magnitude of his disaster. The 18th of August brought me the awful tidings. The mother and the sister were out there in mid-Atlantic, ignorant of what was happening; flying to meet this incredible calamity. All that could be done to protect them from the full force of the shock was done by relatives and good friends. They went down the Bay and met the ship at night, but did not show themselves until morning, and then only to Clara. When she returned to the stateroom she did not speak, and did not need to. Her mother looked at her and said, “Susy said, ¶ “Susy said no ¶ “Susiey said no ¶ “Susy said, no ¶ “Susy is dead.” ¶ “Susy Hobby first typed the quoted words to follow ‘said’ without any punctuation, as in TS1 and TS2, then she canceled and retyped them with a paragraph indent on the next line, which prompted SLC to add a comma after ‘said’ said: ¶ “Susy is dead.” At half past half past half-past half past ten o’clock that night, night, night, night, Clara and her mother completed their circuit of the globe, and drew up at Elmira by the same train and in the same car which had borne them and me westward westward Westward from it one year, one month, and one week before. And again Susy Susy Susiey Susy was there—not waving her welcome in the glare of the lights lights lights lights, as she had waved her farewell to us thirteen months before, but lying white and fair in her coffin, in the house where she was born. The last thirteen days of Susy’s Susy’s Susiey’s Susy’s life were spent in our own house in Hartford, the home of her childhood childhood childhood childhood, and always the dearest place in in oin in the earth to her. About her she had faithful old friends—her pastor, Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , who had known her from the cradle, and who had come a long journey to be with her; her uncle and aunt, Mr. and Mrs. Theodore Crane; Patrick, the coachman; Katy Katy Katiey Katy , who had begun to serve us when Susy Susy Susiey Susy was a child of eight years; John and Ellen, who had been with us many many ten or twelve many many years. Also Jean was there. At the hour when my wife and Clara set sail for America, Susy Susy Susiey Susy was in no danger. Three hours later there came a sudden change for the worse. Meningitis set in, and it was immediately apparent that she was death-struck. That was Saturday, the 15th of August. “That evening she took food for the last time.” time.” time.” time,” (Jean’s letter to me.) me.) me). The The “The The next morning the brain-fever was raging. She walked the floor a little in her pain and delirium, then succumbed to weakness and returned to her bed. Previously she had found hanging in a closet a gown which she had seen her mother wear. She thought it was her mother, dead, and she kissed it, and cried. About noon she became blind (an effect of the disease) and bewailed it to her uncle. uncle. uncle.” uncle. From Jean’s letter I take this sentence, which needs no comment: “About one in the afternoon Susy Susy Susiey Susy spoke for the last time.” It time.” ¶ It time.” ¶ It time.” ¶ It was only one word that she said when she spoke that last time, and it told of her longing. She groped with her hands and found Katy, Katy, Katiey, Katy, and caressed her face face face face, and said “mamma.” “mamma.” ‘“Mamma.’”” single quotation marks mended to double “Mamma.” How gracious it was that that that that, in that forlorn hour of wreck and ruin, with the night of death closing around her, she should have been granted that beautiful illusion—that the latest vision which rested upon the clouded mirror of her mind should have been the vision of her mother, and the latest emotion she should know in life the joy and peace of that dear imagined presence. About two o’clock she composed herself as if for sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep, and never moved again. She fell into unconsciousness and so remained two days and five hours, until Tuesday evening at seven minutes past seven, when the release came. She was twenty-four years and five months old. On the 23d 23d 23rd 23d, extra space after ‘23d,’ marked for deletion 23d, her mother and her sisters saw her laid to rest—she that had been our wonder and our worship. In one of her own books I find some verses which I will copy here. Apparently Apparently Apparently Apparently, she always put borrowed matter in quotation marks. These verses lack those marks, and therefore I take them to be her own. own. own. own: Love Love “Love Love came at dawn, when all the world was fair, fair, fair, fair, When crimson glories, bloom, and song glories, bloom, and song glories’ bloom and sun were rife; Love came at dawn dawn dawn dawn deleted, then restored with the instruction ‘Stet’ dawn, when hope’s wings fanned the air, air, air, air, And murmured murmured murmured murmured, “I am life.” “I am life.” ‘“I am life.’” single quotation marks mended to double “I am life.” Love Love ‘Love Love came at even, even, eve, and when the day was done, done, done, done, When heart and brain were tired, tired, tired, tired, and slumber pressed; Love came at eve, shut out the sinking sun, sun, sun, sun, And whispered whispered whispered whispered, “I am rest.” “I am rest.” ‘“I am rest.’” single quotation marks mended to double “I am rest.” The summer seasons of Susy’s Susy’s Susiey’s Susy’s childhood were spent at Quarry Farm Farm Farm Farm, on the hills east of Elmira, New York, the York, the York,. Tthe York, the York; the other seasons of the year at the home in Hartford. Like other children, she was blithe and happy, fond of play; unlike the average of children children children children, she was at times much given to retiring within herself herself herself herself, and trying to search out the hidden meanings of the deep things that make the puzzle and pathos of human existence, and in all the ages have baffled the inquirer and mocked him. As a little child aged seven, she was oppressed and perplexed by the maddening repetition of the stock incidents of our race’s fleeting sojourn here, just as the same thing has oppressed and perplexed maturer minds from the beginning of time. A myriad of men are born; they born; they born;. Tthey period mended to a semicolon born; they labor and sweat and struggle for bread; they squabble and scold and fight; they scramble for little mean advantages over each other; age other; age other. Age other;. Aage other; age creeps upon them; infirmities follow; shames and humiliations bring down their prides and their vanities; those vanities; those vanities. Those vanities;.Tthose vanities; those they love are taken from them, and the joy of life is turned to aching grief. The burden of pain, care, misery, grows heavier year by year; at year; at year. At year;. Aat year; at length length length length, ambition is dead; pride dead; pride dead;. Ppride period mended to a semicolon dead; pride dead, pride is dead; vanity dead; vanity dead;. Vvanity period mended to a semicolon dead; vanity is dead; longing dead; longing dead;. Llonging period mended to a semicolon dead; longing for release is in their place. It comes at last—the only unpoisoned gift earth ever had for them—and they vanish from a world where they were of no consequence; where they achieved nothing; where they were a mistake and a failure and a foolishness; where where where there they have left no sign that they have existed—a world which will lament them a day and forget them forever. Then another myriad takes their place, place, place, place, and copies all they did, and goes along the same profitless road, and vanishes as they vanished—to make room for another and another another and another another and another another, and another, and a million other myriads myriads myriads myriads, to follow the same arid path through the same desert desert desert desert, and accomplish what the first myriad, and all the myriads that came after it myriad, and all the myriads that came after it myriad, and all the myriads that came after it myriad probable eyeskip myriad, and all the myriads that came after it, accomplished—nothing! “Mamma, what is it all for?” asked Susy Susy Susiey Susy , preliminarily stating the above details in her own halting language, after long brooding over them alone in the privacy of the nursery. A year later, she was groping her way alone through another sunless bog, but this time she reached a rest for her feet. For a week, her mother had not been able to go to the nursery, evenings, nursery, evenings, nursery, evenings, nursery, evenings, at the child’s prayer hour. She spoke of it—was sorry for it, and said she would come to-night, and hoped she could continue to come every night and hear Susy Susy Susiey Susy pray, as before. Noticing that the child wished to respond, but was evidently troubled as to how to word her answer, she asked what the difficulty was. Susy Susy Susiey Susy explained that Miss Foote (the governess) had been teaching her about the Indians and their religious beliefs, whereby it appeared that they had not only a God, but several. This had set Susy Susy Susiey Susy to thinking. As a result of this thinking, she had stopped praying. She qualified qualified grounded qualified qualified this statement—that is is is is, she modified it—saying she did not now pray “in the same way” as she had formerly done. Her mother said, “Tell said, ¶ “Tell said no ¶ “Tell said, ¶ “Tell said: ¶ “Tell me about it, dear.” “Well, mamma, the Indians believed they knew, but now we know they were wrong. By and by by by by, it can turn out that we are wrong. So now I only pray that there may be a God and a heaven heaven heaven Heaven —or something better.” I wrote down this pathetic prayer in its precise wording, at the time, in a record which we kept of the children’s sayings, and my reverence for it has grown with the years that have passed over my head since then. Its untaught grace and simplicity are a child’s, but the wisdom and the pathos of it are of all the ages that have come and gone since the race of man has lived, lived, lived, lived, and longed, longed, longed, longed, and hoped, hoped, hoped, hoped, and feared, feared, feared, feared, and doubted. To go back a year—Susy Susy Susiey Susy aged seven. Several times her mother said to her, “There her, ¶ “There her, no ¶ “There her, no ¶ “There her, ¶ “There her: ¶ “There , there, Susy Susy Susiey Susy , you mustn’t cry over little things.” This furnished Susy Susy Susiey Susy a text for thought. She had been breaking her heart over what had seemed vast disasters—a broken toy; a picnic canceled canceled canceled cancelled by thunder and lightning and rain; the mouse that was growing tame and friendly in the nursery caught and killed by the cat—and now came this strange revelation. For some unaccountable reason, these were not vast calamities. Why? How is the size of calamities measured? What is the rule? There must be some way to tell the great ones from the small ones; what is the law of these proportions? She examined the problem earnestly and long. She gave it her best thought, thought, thought, thought from time to time, for two or three days—but it baffled her—defeated her. And at last she gave up and went to her mother for help. “Mamma, what is ‘little little little little ‘little’ underscored little ‘little’ underscored little things’?” It seemed a simple question—at first. And yet yet yet yet, before the answer could be put into words, unsuspected and unforeseen difficulties began to appear. They increased; they multiplied; they brought about another defeat. The effort to explain came to a standstill. Then Susy Susy Susiey Susy tried to help her mother out—with an instance, an example, an illustration. The mother was getting ready to go go go do down town down town down town down-town , and one of her errands was to buy a long-promised long-promised long-promised long-promised toy watch toy watch toy watch toy-watch for Susy Susy Susiey Susy . “If you forgot the watch, mamma mamma Mamma mamma , would that be a little thing?” She was not concerned about the watch, for she knew it would not be forgotten. What she was hoping for was that the answer would unriddle the riddle riddle riddle riddle, and bring rest and peace to her perplexed little mind. The hope was disappointed, of course—for the reason that the size of a misfortune is not determinable by an outsider’s measurement of it, but only by the measurements applied to it by the person specially affected by it. The king’s lost crown is a vast matter to the king, but of no consequence to the child. The lost toy is a great great greater great matter to the child, but in the king’s eyes it is not a thing to break the heart about. A verdict was reached, but it was based upon the above model, model, particular, model, model, and Susy Susy Susiey Susy was granted leave to measure her disasters thereafter with her own tape-line. I will throw in a note or two here touching the time when Susy Susy Susiey Susy was seventeen. She She Susiey She She had written a play modeled upon Greek lines, and she and Clara and Margaret Warner, and other young comrades comrades friends, comrades comrades had played it to a charmed housefull housefull houseful of friends in our house in Hartford. Charles Dudley Warner and his brother, George, were present. They were near neighbors and warm friends of ours. They were full of praises of the workmanship of the play, and George Warner came over the next morning and had a long talk with Susy Susy Susiey Susy . The result of it was this verdict: “She ¶ “She ¶ “She ¶ “She is the most interesting person I have ever known, of either sex.” Remark of a lady—Mrs. Cheney, I think, author of the biography of her father, Rev. Dr. Bushnell: “I made this note after one of my talks with Susy Susy Susiey Susy : ‘She knows all there is of life and its meanings. She could not know it better if she had lived it out to its limit. Her intuitions and ponderings and analyzings seem to have taught her all that my sixty years have taught me.’ ” Remark of another lady; she is speaking of Susy’s Susy’s Susiey’s Susy’s last days: “In those last days she walked as if on air, and her walk answered to the buoyancy of her spirits and the passion of intellectual energy and activity that possessed her.” her.” her.” extra half line of space, marked for deletion and then the mark canceled her.” I return now to the point where I made this diversion. From her earliest days, as I have already indicated, Susy Susy Susiey Susy was given to examining examining explaining examining examining things and thinking them out by herself. She was not trained to this; it was the make of her mind. In matters involving questions of fair or unfair dealing, she reviewed the details patiently, and surely arrived at at at as a right and logical conclusion. In Munich, when she was six years old, she was harassed by a recurrent dream, in which a ferocious bear figured. She came out of the dream each time sorely frightened, and crying. She set herself the task of analyzing this dream. The reasons of it? The purpose of it? The origin of it? No—the moral aspect of it. Her verdict, arrived at after candid and searching investigation, exposed it to the charge of being one-sided and unfair in its construction: for (as she worded it), (as she worded it), (as she worded it), (as she worded it), she was “never the one that ate, but always the one that was eaten.” Susy Susy Susiey Susy backed her good judgment judgment judgement judgment in matters of morals with conduct to match—even upon occasions when it caused her sacrifice to do it. When she was six and her sister Clara four, the pair were troublesomely quarrelsome. Punishments were tried as a means of breaking up this custom—these failed. Then rewards were tried. A day without a quarrel brought candy. The children were their own witnesses—each for or against her own self. Once Susy Susy Susiey Susy took the candy, hesitated, then returned it with a suggestion that she was not fairly entitled to it. Clara kept hers,—so, here was a hers,—so, here was a hers, a—so, here was a hers,—so here was a conflict of evidence; one witness for a quarrel, and one against it. But the better witness of the two was on the affirmative affirmative affirmitive side, and the quarrel stood proved, and no candy due to either side. proved, and no candy due to either side. proved., and no candy due to either side. proved, and no candy due to either side. There seemed to be no defence defence defense for Clara—yet there was, and Susy Susy Susiey Susy furnished it; it; it,; comma mended to a semicolon it; and Clara went free. Susy Susy Susiey Susy said “I don’t know whether she felt wrong in her heart, but I didn’t feel right in my heart.” It was a fair and honorable view of the case, and a specially acute analysis of it for a child of six to make. There was no way to convict Clara now, except to put her on the stand again and review her evidence. There was a doubt as to the fairness of this procedure, since her former evidence had been accepted, and not challenged at the time. The doubt was examined, and canvassed—then she was given the benefit of it and acquitted; acquitted; acquitted,; comma mended to a semicolon acquitted; which was just as well, for in the meantime she had eaten the candy, anyway. Whenever I think of Susy Susy Susiey Susy I think of Marjorie Fleming. There was but one Marjorie Fleming. There can never be another. No doubt I think of Marjorie when I think of Susy Susy Susiey Susy mainly because Dr. John Brown, that noble and beautiful soul—rescuer of marvelous Marjorie from oblivion—was Susy’s Susy’s Susiey’s Susy’s great friend in her babyhood—her worshipper and willing slave. In 1873, when Susy Susy Susiey Susy was fourteen months old, 1873 1873 (1873) typed in the margin, deleted by Harvey not in we arrived in Edinburgh from London, fleeing thither for rest and refuge, after experiencing what had been to us an entirely new kind of life—six weeks of daily lunches, teas, and dinners away from home. We carried no letters of introduction; we hid ourselves away in Veitch’s family hotel in George street street Street , and prepared to have a comfortable season all to ourselves. But by good fortune this did not happen. Straightway Mrs. Clemens needed a physician, and I stepped around to 23 Rutland street street Street to see if the author of “Rab and His Friends” was still a practising physician. He was. He came, and for six weeks thereafter we were together every day, either in his house or in our hotel.