29 May 1907 Dictated Wednesday, May 29, 1907 1907 ’07 Copy of letter from California lawyer regarding Jim Gillis—Roosevelt’s attack upon Dr. Long, the naturalist, and newspaper clippings regarding it. A letter has arrived from a lawyer resident in Sonora, California, which gratifies me because it speaks well of Jim Gillis, and because it proves to me that Jim remained, to the end, the same Jim whom I last looked upon thirty-nine years ago. I will insert it here. Dear Sir:— Your acquaintance with me is about the same as mine with the President, I know him but he does not know me that I know of, or at least the chances are about 1 in 80,000,000 that he would not remember me, having never met me personally. However, I am a native of Tuolumne County, for 45 years, at least that is what I am told, for the first few years of my stay here were a little hazy. Perhaps it was owing to the fact that I was under the care of a nurse and allowed a milk diet. Now laying alleged jokes aside, I simply want to tell you in an old-fashioned way that Jim Gillis, of Jackass Hill, passed over the Great Divide. If “Jim” wasn’t wasn’t was n’t a mighty good man, I would not take the pains to let you know this. He has enjoyed the peculiar habit of being strictly honest. Told truths about himself and his friends, when perhaps a lie would have been better appreciated. On all occasions looked Dame Nature square in the face. But he is gone, and I know that you will be sorry to hear it. He had a letter from you once, and it was the prize of his heart. He did not wear it out, as might an ordinary autograph fiend have done, but it was exhibited only to rare old cronies. About the greatest compliment he could offer, was to show one that letter of Mark Twain’s. Now, I send this in good faith, without any design to creep into your acquaintance by the back door. But in honor to “Jim.” Very kindly, Crittenden Hampton. President Roosevelt has been having a scrap with the Rev. Dr. Long, who is a naturalist equipped with a pleasant and entertaining pen. Mr. Long is not a heavy-weight like John Burroughs, and has never intimated, as John has seemed to intimate, that he knows more about an animal than the animal knows about itself. Mr. Long’s books are very popular, particularly among the young people. He tells many amusing and interesting things about the wild creatures of the forest, and he does not speak from hearsay, but from observation. He tells what he has seen the animal do, not what it is not what it is but not what they are it is reported to have done. If he misinterprets the actions of the animals and infers from them intellectual qualities of a higher order than they perhaps possess, is that a crime? I think not—although the President of the United States thinks it is. I think it is far from being a crime. Ninety-six per cent of our newspapers, and 98 per cent 98 per cent ninety-eight per cent. of our eighty million citizens, believe that the President is possessed of high intellectual qualities. Is that a crime? I do not think so. I think it is merely stupidity, and stupidity is not a crime. The other day the President allowed the affairs of the universe to stand unmolested during thirty minutes, while he got himself interviewed for the Outlook, and launched a devastating assault upon poor obscure little Mr. Long, and made a noise over him the like of which has not been heard on the planet since the hostile fleets opened upon each other with two thousand shells a minute, in the Japan Sea. What had Mr. Long been doing? He had merely been telling how he had found a deer whose breast had just been fatally torn by a wolf; and how he had also seen a wild bird mend its broken leg by smart devices invented by itself and successfully consummated without anybody else’s help. No doubt these were extraordinary incidents, but what of that? Does their unusualness make them incredible? Indeed it does not. Wild creatures often do extraordinary things. Look at Mr. Roosevelt’s own performances. Did he not fling the faithful Bowen out of office, and whitewash and deodorize the mephitic Loomis? Didn’t he promulgate the illegal Order 78? Hasn’t he tunneled so many subways under the Constitution that the transportation-facilities transportation-facilities transportation-facilities through that document are only rivaled, not surpassed, by those now enjoyed by the City of New York? Didn’t he send a bouquet and a broken heart to lay upon the corpse of Mr. Quay? Hasn’t he tacitly claimed, some dozens of times, that he is the only person in America who knows how to speak the truth—quite ignoring me, and other professionals? Hasn’t he kept up such a continual thundering from our Olympus about foot-ball foot-ball foot-ball and base ball base ball baseball , and molly-coddles, and all sorts of little nursery matters, that we have come to stand in fear that the first time an exigency of real importance shall arise, our thunders will not be able to attract the world’s notice or exert any valuable influence upon ourselves? ourselves? ourselves. And so on, and so on—the list of unpresidential things, things hitherto deemed impossible, wholly impossible, measurelessly impossible for a president of the United States to do—is much too long for invoicing here. When a president can do these extraordinary things, why can’t he allow a poor little unoffending bird to work a marvelous surgical operation without finding fault with it? That surgical operation is impossible, at first glance, but it is not any more impossible than is Order 78. It is not easy to believe that either of them happened; but we all know that Order 78 happened, therefore we are justified in believing in the bird’s surgery. Order 78 should make it easy for us to believe in anything that can be charged against a bird. I should think that if a person were offered his choice as between risking his character upon the bird-story or upon the authorship of Order 78, he ought not to have any difficulty about which of the two to choose. I should think that a judicious person would rather father all the lies that have ever been told about the animal world than have it found out that he invented Order 78. Perhaps it is a marvelous thing for a bird to mend its broken leg; but is it half as marvelous, as extraordinary, as incredible, as that the autocrat over a nation of eighty millions should come down from his summit in the clouds to destroy a wee little naturalist who was engaged in the harmless business of amusing a nursery? Is it as extraordinary as the spectacle of a president of the United States attacking a private citizen without offering anything describable as evidence that he is qualified for the office of critic—and then refusing to listen to the man’s defence defence defense , and and and then following this uncourteous attack by backing out of the dispute upon the plea that it would not be consonant with the dignity of his great office to further notice such a person? The President is badly worsted in the scrap, and I think he is wise in backing out of it. There was no respectable way out, and I think it was plainly best for him to accept and confess defeat, in silence. And he would be safe in any course he might pursue, whatever that course might be, for the newspapers would praise it, and admire it, and the nation would applaud. It is long since the head of any nation has been so blindly and unreasoningly worshiped as is President Roosevelt by this nation to-day. If he should die now, he would be mourned as no ruler has been mourned save Nero. I wish to copy here a part of this pitiable fight, of the dates May 22 and May 28, and I wish I could be here fifty years hence and listen while some sane person should read these notes, and get him to tell me how they impress him. I feel quite sure that in that day the mention of Theodore’s name will will will surely excite laughter—laughter at the eighty millions as well as at himself. ROOSEVELT ONLY A GAMEKILLER—LONG Stamford Naturalist Strikes Back at Criticism of His Nature Books. ASSERTS IT WAS ANIMUS Dogmatic Utterances Without a Shred of Positive Evidence—Attacks the President’s Own Writings. Special to The New York Times. STAMFORD, Conn., May 22.—The Rev. Dr. William J. Long to-day gave out an interview in reply to President Roosevelt’s criticism of his nature books. He intimates that the President is angry because he dared to criticise his method of slaughtering game promiscuously. He also says the President is taking up cudgels in behalf of John Burroughs, the naturalist, with whom Dr. Long carried on a bitter controversy in magazines and newspapers a few years ago. Burroughs and President Roosevelt are close friends. “A Man Named Roosevelt.” “I have no desire for a controversy with the President of the United States,” said Dr. Long. “I have a profound respect for that office, which is not modified or changed in the least by any man occupying the office. The point is that a man named Roosevelt has gone out of his way to make a violent attack upon me and my books. Ordinarily, I would ignore such an attack. If you read the article, even carelessly, you will see it is personal and venomous in spirit, while its literary style makes it fit for the waste basket. “The title of this article is ‘Roosevelt on the Nature Fakirs.’ The first thing I notice about the article is that it is itself a fake. Mr. Roosevelt has frequently declared, in the midst of his endless personal squabbles, that the President must not enter into a personal controversy. In the present case, this alleged interview is one of the transparent modesties behind which he conceals his colossal vanity. “Mr. Roosevelt arranged this interview, and, as I am informed by the magazine, revised the proofs, from the gross personal flattery at the beginning to the unfounded charge at the end. In concealing himself behind an alleged interview, and using his position to attack a man of whose spirit he knows nothing, his article seems to me not only venomous but a little cowardly—just as when he hides behind a tree and kills three bull elks in succession, leaving their carcasses to rot in the woods. That in itself is incomprehensible to sportsmen. But what jars you altogether is the preaching which follows on the heroism and high moral qualities developed by hunting. “The next thing manifest in the article, even to the most casual reader, is the personal animosity. He devotes three-quarters of his attack to me, and, as I am the only one whose books are used in the public schools—which, by the way, he considers an outrage—the whole weight of his attack falls upon one man. The Motive Behind It. “Now, the reasons for this are perfectly plain. Some years ago a violent attack was made upon me and my books by one of Mr. Roosevelt’s friends. That attack was met, and every honest argument it contained was frankly answered. But that was not enough. Mr. Roosevelt, with that love of peace which characterizes him, immediately jumped into the conflict, and in the preface to his last book he goes far out of his way for the sake of repeating his friend’s attack. “Then, again, a short time ago I wrote a series of articles which attempted to look at human life from the animal’s standpoint, and in one of these I considered the subject of hunting. In this article it seemed to a simple mind, without prejudice, as if the promiscuous slaughter of game which, as Roosevelt claimed, develops heroism and manly virtue, was in reality a sort of brutal thoughtlessness. “Mr. Roosevelt has never forgiven the poor animal who dared to criticise his hunting, and twice to my knowledge has declared to his associates that he would ‘get even’ and would even ‘do me up.’ “The magazine article is the fulfillment of his declaration. Hence we can understand its spirit perfectly. As for the argument of the article, it is precisely like its predecessors—a series of dogmatic utterances and denials, without a shred of positive evidence to support them. He calls for evidence, but forgets the fact that his predecessors, in their attacks, did the same thing, and that the evidence was instantly produced. They took the most improbable thing I ever wrote—a story of a woodcock setting its own broken leg in a clay cast—and called this a gross deception, verging on lunacy, and demanded that I produce evidence or witnesses witnesses witnesses wirtnesses . I at once published a record of five cases, with the sworn testimony of eight witnesses. Lynx and White Wolf. “Mr. Roosevelt, in the same spirit, makes attacks upon certain statements concerning the Canada lynx and the great white wolf of the north, declaring positively that certain things recorded of them never happened.” Dr. Long, opening one of Mr. Roosevelt’s books, continued: “Now see what Mr. Roosevelt himself says: ‘Wolves show an infinite variety in spite and temper.’ Again: ‘The differences between related animals are literally inexplicable.’ It seems almost unkind to point out that Mr. Roosevelt never saw either the Canada lynx or the white wolf in their own woods. What he knows about lynxes and wolves he has learned in chasing different animals in different parts of the country, with a pack of savage dogs to help him understand their individual peculiarities. “The one thing he declares to be a mathematical impossibility is that a huge wolf should kill a small deer by biting biting biting hitting into the deer’s chest. Now, those who have ever dressed a deer have noticed that the lower part of the chest narrows to a wedge shape, and when the shoulder-blades slide forward or back—as they do easily, the blades not being attached to the skeleton—it leaves a narrow part of the chest exposed, and it would be the simplest thing in the world for any large animal to get in a deadly bite.” bite.” bite.” blow. Dr. Long then takes up the assertion of the President that a wolf could not kill a deer by biting into the deer’s chest, and explains how the shifting shoulder blades allow a soft cartilage to be unprotected. He says he has seen deer which have been killed this way, and Indian guides have confirmed this. “So much for the mathematical possibility. Now for facts. I once came upon a small deer lying in the snow, still living, but bleeding from tooth wounds in the under side of its chest. From the deer the tracks of a large wolf led off into the woods. It had probably heard or smelled me, and had slunk away within a few moments of the time I found its victim. More than this, the Indian with whom I explored the interior of Newfoundland tells me he has twice seen a huge white wolf kill caribou fawns this way. That this is an unusual method of killing goes without saying, but that it is both possible and probable remains a fact, despite Mr. Roosevelt’s denial. It is a pity that animals and men do not conform their habits to the President’s dictates, but the fact is they don’t. “There are several other points in the article worthy of attention, and in two or three of them Mr. Roosevelt lays himself open to attack by the utter absurdity of his dogmatic assertions. I shall answer these fully in a special article on the subject.” Quotes His Records. Dr. Long opened in succession two of Mr. Roosevelt’s books, and quoted a dozen records from Mr. Roosevelt’s own “nature books.” “It seems,” continued Dr. Long, “almost impossible that such a variety of atrocious records could be found by scores in these books, but such is the fact. I suggest that one who would understand Mr. Roosevelt’s attack read Roosevelt’s ‘Wilderness Hunter,’ and then read ‘Wild Ways,’ which he condemns. Mr. Roosevelt will then understand perfectly why he has no sympathy with any brand of nature study except his own. “In a word, Mr. Roosevelt is not a naturalist, but a gamekiller. Of the real spirit of animal life, of their habits as discovered by quiet watching with no desire to kill, he knows nothing, and never will learn until he goes into the woods, leaving his pack of dogs, his rifle, his prejudice, and his present disposition behind him.” LONG ASKS APOLOGY FROM THE PRESIDENT. Demands That He Retract “Fakir” Statements or Prove Them. Stamford, Conn., May 28.—Dr. William J. Long to-day to-day to-day made public an open letter he has written President Roosevelt, which adds an interesting chapter to their “nature fakir” controversy. In part it is as follows: “Stamford, Conn, May 28, 1907. His Excellency, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States: Dear Sir: The issue between you and me is no longer one of animals, but of men; it is not chiefly a matter of natural history, but of truth and personal honor. As President of the United States you have gone out of your way publicly to injure a private citizen who was attending strictly to his own business. As a man you have accused of falsehood another man whose ideas of truth and honor are quite as high as your own. If I have spoken falsely, if in any book or word of mine I have intentionally deceived any child or man regarding animal life, I promise publicly to retract every such word and never to write another animal book. On the other hand, if I show to any disinterested person that you have accused me falsely you must publicly withdraw your accusation and apologize. As a man and as President no other honorable course is open to you.” Dr. Long submits an affidavit to sustain the truth of the story President Roosevelt calls a mathematical impossibility, and then he continues: “You cannot at this stage, Mr. Roosevelt, take refuge behind the Presidential office and be silent. You have forfeited your right to that silence by breaking it, by coming out in public to attack a private citizen. If your talk of a square deal is not all a sham, if your frequent moral preaching is not all hypocrisy, I call upon you as President and as a man to come out and admit the error and injustice of your charge in the same open and public way in which you made it. Very sincerely yours, W. J. Long.” SECY. LOEB CALLS IT A “DRAW.” The President Will Not Reply to the Rev. Dr. Long’s Retort. (Special to The World.) WASHINGTON, May 28.—Private Secretary Loeb is willing to call the match a draw, it seems. The Rev. Dr. Long’s retort on the President was shown to Mr. Loeb to-night to-night to-night to-night by a representative of The World, who asked him to show it to Mr. Roosevelt. Mr. Loeb declined to do so, saying: “The President will pay no further attention to Dr. Long.” Nor will the President appoint anyone to investigate the truthfulness of S. J. (Sporting Judge) Hepidan, the educated Sioux Indian, who is Dr. Long’s second and who swears he saw a horse a wolf had killed by tearing its breast to the heart.