3 April 1906 Tuesday, April 3, 1906 The Barnes incident again—Barnes appointed to postmastership postmastership Postmastership of Washington—Mr. Clemens prepares speech on King Leopold of Belgium, but suppresses it after learning that our Government will do nothing in the matter—Intends to speak at Majestic Theatre on “The American Gentleman” but is defeated by length of first part of program program programme —Theodore Roosevelt the American gentleman—Mark Twain letter sells for forty-three dollars forty-three dollars $43. at Nast sale—Report cabled that Mr. Clemens was dying, in London—Reporters interview him for American papers. BARNES’S BARNES’S The representative American—the President. BARNES’S BARNES’S APPOINTMENT ANGERS WASHINGTON “White “White insolence “White ‘insolence’ interlined above “White House Strong-Arm Methods,” Says a Local Newspaper. SENATE MAY HOLD IT UP New New Is it Pr. suicide? New ‘Is it Pr. suicide?’ interlined above New Postmaster Characterized as a Carpetbagger—Citizens Say Selection Is an Insult. Special to The New York Times. WASHINGTON, April 2.—The President’s selection of Benjamin F. Barnes, his assistant secretary, to be Postmaster of Washington has raised a storm. It is being criticised as a “carpetbag” appointment, Barnes being a New Jersey man. Members of the House and Senate criticise it, and it is reported that an effort will be made to defeat the confirmation. The feeling on the subject is shown to-night in the appearance of The Evening Star, the Administration’s strongest supporter in the city press. The Barnes matter breaks out all over the paper. First, there is a cartoon representing the President handing the District of Columbia an April fool cigar, which explodes, the face of Barnes appearing in the smoke, while the President shouts “April Fool!” Next there are three columns of interviews with prominent citizens of the District and members of Congress, all condemning the appointment. The leading editorial article is devoted to the subject, and says that the President has rewarded “his tactless and too strenuous bouncer” by giving him the Washington Post Office at double his present salary. The Star says: “There remain, logically, to be rewarded at the expense of the District, the policemen policemen policeman policemen who shared with Mr. Barnes the honors in the Morris drag-out. What shall their harvest be—a local Judgeship, Commissionership, or Superintendency of Police?” The Star prints a string of clippings from other papers ridiculing the appointment. Then, all over the editorial page are scattered detached paragraphs like these: The these: . . . [¶] The these: (Insert—(use pins) [¶] The these: hieroglyphs drawn by SLC [¶] The application of White House strong-arm methods to the local Postal Service may relieve the patrons of the office of the necessity of licking their own stamps. Much as Oyster Bay approves of the President it would rise in indignation if he used his influence to supplant its local men in local offices. The April Fool wag becomes less violent as the years go by. His style of humor is but seldom exploited to any shocking extent. The recent appointment of a Postmaster for Washington offers a contrary argument, but it is only one of those exceptions which prove the rule. When in future your letters seem to have been hit by a cyclone, passed through a train wreck, and run through a sausage machine you will know that they have come out of the Washington Post Office. But don’t go to the Post Office to complain unless in need of exercise. Ladies should observe extreme caution in this matter. Some of the President’s local proteges are as enthusiastic for Mr. Barnes as they were for the whipping post not long ago. There is a strong feeling that in the matter of appointments Niagara Falls has very much the better of the transaction. The last reference is to the transfer of Postmaster Merritt to Niagara Falls to make room for Mr. Barnes. Finally The Star prints letters from citizens to the editor protesting against the appointment. Among the interviews with prominent citizens is one with R. Ross Perry, a leading lawyer, who says: “Apparently the President thinks this district should be governed as the Romans governed a conquered province.” D. William Oyster calls it “an insult to our community.” Mason W. Richardson says: “We seem to have no rights that are worthy of respect.” John Ridout says, “in view of the temperament of Mr. Barnes, as disclosed in the Morris incident, the prospect for satisfactory interviews between him and citizens acting in the exercise of their right to criticise the administration of his office is not encouraging.” So So This goes in first, but I will not comment upon it until later. [¶] So far as I can remember, I have kept track of the Barnes incident by occasionally inserting an informing clipping from the newspapers. If anything is lacking from this procession of signal-posts it is the President’s letter of some weeks ago. 1906 1906 1906 inserted in the margin (1906) typed in the margin Maybe I inserted it. Possibly I didn’t. But it is no matter. Either way will do. It was splendidly brutal, frankly heartless. It contained not a word of pity for the abused lady; and an equally striking feature of it was that it contained not a word of pity for the President himself. Surely everybody else pitied him, and was ashamed of him. It contained not a word of rebuke, nor even of criticism of Barnes’s conduct, and its approval of it was so pronounced that the spirit of it amounted to praise. And now the President has appointed this obscene slave to the postmastership postmastership Postmastership of Washington. The daring of it—the stupid blindness of it—is amazing. It would be unbelievable if it emanated from any human being in the United States except our incredible President. When Choate and I agreed to speak at Carnegie Hall on the 22d 22d 22nd of January, along with Booker Washington, in the interest of his Tuskegee Institute, I at first took that thief and assassin, Leopold II II II. King of the Belgians, as my text, and carefully prepared a speech—wrote it out in full, in fact, several weeks beforehand. But when the appointed date was drawing near I began to grow suspicious of our Government’s attitude toward Leopold and his fiendishnesses. Twice I went to Washington and conferred with the State Department. Then I began to suspect that the Congo Reform Association’s conviction that our Government’s pledged honor was at stake in the Congo matter was an exaggeration; that the Association was attaching meanings to certain public documents connected with the Congo which the strict sense of the documents did not confirm. A final visit to the State Department settled the matter. The Department had kept its promise, promise, promise, promise, previously made to the President and to me, that it would examine into the matter exhaustively and see how our Government stood. It was found that of the fourteen Christian Governments pledged to watch over Leopold and keep him within treaty limits, our Government was not one. Our Government was only sentimentally concerned, not officially, not practically, not by any form of pledge or promise. Our Government could interfere in the form of prayer or protest, but so could a Sunday-school. I knew that the Administration was going to be properly and diplomatically polite, and keep out of the muddle; therefore I privately withdrew from the business of agitating the Congo matter in the United States, and wrote the Boston branch that I thought it would be a pity to wring the hearts of this nation further with the atrocities Leopold was committing upon those helpless black natives of the Congo, since this would be to harrow up the feelings of the nation to no purpose—since the nation itself could do nothing save through its Government, and the Government would of course do nothing. So I suppressed that speech and delivered one in its stead on another subject. subject. subject. [Insert Carnegie Hall Speech here.] subject. (Insert Carnegie Hall Speech here.) But before selecting that subject I examined another one and prepared a speech upon it. If that speech had had a title I suppose it would have been “What is an American Gentleman?” Or maybe it would have been “America, the Land of the Free and the Home of the Brave and of the Ill-mannered”—or possibly it might have been “The Unpolite Nation.” I did not throw the speech away, but saved it, hoping for the right occasion. The right occasion arrived, a few weeks ago, when I was to speak in the Majestic Theatre Theatre Theater on Sunday afternoon to a couple of thousand male Young Young young Christians who might take an interest in hearing the views of an expert upon the qualities required to constitute an American gentleman. But I was defeated again. The program program programme was of the customary sort, where many persons are giving their time and labor to a great cause without salary and each must be allowed to step out and dangle himself before the audience by way of remuneration. A man who couldn’t speak, speak, speak, speak, spoke. And a woman who couldn’t sing, sing, sing, sing, sang. Another man who couldn’t speak, speak, speak, speak, spoke. A mixed string-and-piano-band made some noises, and when the house rejoiced that the affliction was over, the band took it for an encore and did the noises over again. Then a man who couldn’t read, read, read, read, read a chapter from the Bible—and so this chaos went on and on. And every now and then God in His His His ‘h’ underscored twice to capitalize His inscrutable wisdom would turn that singer loose again. I thought my turn would never come. At last when it did arrive I saw that I must cut myself down by half; that instead of allowing myself an hour, I must put up with 50 50 fifty per cent cent cent. of that. The result was that I talked upon a text—a good text, too—dropped by one of those speakers who couldn’t speak, and who didn’t know he had dropped it, and never missed it. And so once more my exposition of what the American gentleman should be got suppressed. Now then all this has been fortunate. Still, all Still, all Still, “Aall Still, all good things come to him who waits. waits. waits.” waits. I have waited, because I couldn’t help it, but my reward has come just the same. I don’t have to say, now, what the American gentleman should be—the whole ground can be covered with half a sentence, and an hour’s laborious talk saved by just stating what the American gentleman is. He is Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States. I am not jesting, but am in deep earnest, when I give it as my opinion that our President is the representative American gentleman—of to-day. I think he is as distinctly and definitely the representative American gentleman of to-day as was Washington the representative American gentleman of his day. Roosevelt is the whole argument for and against, in his own person. He represents what the American gentleman ought not to be, and does it as clearly, intelligibly, and exhaustively as he represents what the American gentleman is. We are by long odds the most ill-mannered nation, civilized or savage, that exists on the planet to-day, and our President stands for us like a colossal monument visible from all the ends of the earth. He is fearfully hard and coarse where another gentleman would exhibit kindliness and delicacy. Lately, when that slimy creature of his, that misplaced doctor, that dishonored Governor of Cuba, that sleight of hand Major General Major General Major-General , Leonard Wood, penned up six hundred helpless savages in a hole and butchered every one of them, allowing not even a woman or a child to escape, President Roosevelt—representative American gentleman, First American gentleman—put the heart and soul of our whole nation of gentlemen into into into into the scream of delight which he cabled to Wood congratulating him on this “brilliant feat of arms,” and praising him for thus “upholding the honor of the American flag.” Roosevelt is far and away the worst President we have ever had, and also the most admired and the most satisfactory. The nation’s admiration of him and pride in him and worship of him is far wider, far warmer, and far more general than it has ever before lavished upon a President President president , even including McKinley, Jackson, and Grant. Is the Morris-Barnes incident closed? Possibly yes; possibly no. We will keep an eye on it and see. For the moment, there seems to be something like a revolt there in Washington among half a dozen half a dozen half-a-dozen decent people and one newspaper, but we must not build too much upon this. It is but a limited revolt, and can be vituperated into silence by that vast patriot band of cordial serfs, the American newspaper editors. This is from this morning’s paper: MARK MARK MARK “MARK “MARK an NAR editor queried ‘? note quotation marks’ and SLC replied ‘not needed Mark’ TWAIN LETTER SOLD. Written to Thomas Nast, It Proposed a Joint Tour. Written to Thomas Nast, It Proposed a Joint Tour. Written to Thomas Nast, It Proposed a Joint Tour. Written to Thomas Nast, it Proposed a Joint Tour. Written to Thomas Nast, it Proposed a Joint Tour. A A A “A Mark Twain autograph letter brought $43 yesterday at the auction by the Merwin-Clayton Company of the library and correspondence of the late Thomas Nast, cartoonist. The letter is nine pages note-paper, note-paper, 8vo, 8vo, note,-paper, note-paper, is dated Hartford, Nov. 12, 1877, and is addressed to Nast. It reads in part as follows: Hartford, Nov. 12. My [¶] My [¶] My no ¶ My no ¶ “My [¶] My Dear Nast: I did not think I should ever stand on a platform again until the time was come for me to say “I die innocent.” “I die innocent.” “I die innocent.” ‘“ I die innocent.’” single quotation marks mended to double “I die innocent.” I die innocent. But the same old offers keep arriving that have arriven every year, and been every year declined—$500 for Louisville, $500 for St. Louis, $1,000 gold for two nights in Toronto, half gross proceeds for New York, Boston, Brooklyn, &c. I have declined them all just as usual, though sorely tempted as usual. Now Now Now “Now Now , I do not decline because I mind talking to an audience, but because (1) traveling traveling traveling travelling travelling alone is so heart-breakingly heart-breakingly heart-breaking heart-breakingly heart-breakingly dreary, and (2) shouldering the whole show is such cheer-killing responsibility. Therefore Therefore Therefore “ ‘Therefore “ ‘Therefore I now propose to you what you proposed to me in November, 1867—ten years ago, (when I was unknown,) viz.: That That That that TThat SLC reinscribed the capital letter to confirm it you should stand on the platform and make pictures, and I stand by you and blackguard the audience. I should enormously enjoy meandering around (to big towns—don’t want to go to little ones) with you for company. company. company. company.’ company.’ The The The “The letter includes a schedule of cities and the number of appearances planned for each. each. each. each.”” SLC deleted the quotation marks and Munro reinscribed them each.” This is as it should be. This is worthy of all praise. I say it myself lest other competent persons should forget to do it. It appears that four of my ancient letters were sold at auction, three of them at twenty-seven dollars, twenty-eight dollars, and twenty-nine dollars respectively, and the one above mentioned at forty-three dollars. There is one very gratifying circumstance about this, to wit: that my literature has more than held its own as regards money value through this stretch of thirty-six thirty-six thirty-six thirty-six years. I judge that the forty-three-dollar letter must have gone at about ten cents a word, whereas if I had written it to-day its market rate would be thirty cents—so I have increased in value two or three hundred per cent. I note note note with pleasure note with pleasure note another gratifying circumstance—that a letter of General Grant’s sold at something short of eighteen dollars. I can’t rise to General Grant’s lofty place in the estimation of this nation, but it is a deep happiness to me to know that when it comes to epistolary literature he can’t sit in the front seat along with me. This reminds me—nine years ago, when we were living in Tedworth Square, London, a report was cabled to the American journals that I was dying. I was not the one. It was another Clemens, a cousin of mine,—Dr. J. Ross Clemens, now of St. Louis— —Dr. J. Ross Clemens, now of St. Louis— not in —Dr. J. Ross Clemens, now of St. Louis— inserted first with a caret after ‘Clemens’, caret then moved to after ‘mine,’ —Dr. J. Ross Clemens, now of St. Louis— who was due to die but presently escaped, by some chicanery or other characteristic of the tribe of Clemens Clemens Clemenses Clemenses Clemens . The London representatives of the American papers began to flock in, with American cables in their hands, to inquire into my condition. There was nothing the matter with me, and each in his turn was astonished, and disappointed, disappointed, not gratified, not gratified, disappointed, disappointed, to find me reading and smoking in my study and worth next to nothing as a text for transatlantic news. One of these men was a gentle and kindly and grave and sympathetic Irishman, who hid his sorrow sorrow disappointment disappointment sorrow sorrow the best he could, and tried to look glad, and tried to look glad, and tried to look glad, and tried to look glad, and told me that his paper, the Evening Sun, had cabled him that it was reported in New York that I was dead. What should he cable in reply? I said— “Say said— [¶] “Say said no ¶ “Say said— [¶] “Say the report is greatly greatly not in greatly greatly exaggerated.” He never smiled, but went solemnly away and sent the cable in those words words exact words exact words words . The remark hit the world pleasantly, and to this day it keeps turning up, now and then, in the newspapers when people have occasion to discount exaggerations. The next man was also an Irishman. He had his New York cablegram in his hand—from the New York World—and he was so evidently trying to get around that cable with invented softnesses and palliations that my curiosity was aroused and I wanted to see what it it that the cable the cable the cable it it did really say. So when occasion offered I slipped it out of his hand. It said, “If said, [¶] “If said no ¶ “If said, ¶ “If said, [¶] “If Mark Twain dying send five hundred words. If dead send a a one a a thousand.” Now that old letter of mine sold yesterday for forty-three dollars. When I am dead it will be worth eighty-six.