17 April 1908 Dictated April 17, 1908 Dictated April 17, 1908 Dictated April 17/08. Dictated April 17, ’08. Mr. Clemens’s Club of ten angel-fishes—Headquarters to be in billiard room billiard room billiard-room of new home in Redding—Letter to Mr. Twichell regarding the New Movement originating in Boston. One day at Riverdale-on-the-Hudson Riverdale-on-the-Hudson Riverdale-on-Hudson Mrs. Clemens and I were mourning for our lost little ones. Not that they were dead, but lost to us all the same. Gone out of our our our our lives forever—as little children. They were still with us, but they were become women, and they walked with us upon our own level. There was a wide gulf, gulf, gulf—, gulf, a gulf as wide as the horizons, between these children and those. We were always having vague dream-glimpses of them as they had used to be in the long-vanished years—glimpses of them playing and romping, with short frocks on, and spindle legs, and hair-tails down their backs—and always they were far and dim, and we could not hear their shouts and their laughter. How How Lord, how Lord, hHow we longed to gather them to our arms! but they were only dainty and darling spectres, and they faded away and vanished, and left us desolate. That day I put into verse, as well as I could, the feeling that was haunting us. The verses were not for publication, and were never published, but I will insert them here as being qualified to throw light upon my worship of schoolgirls schoolgirls school girls —if worship be the right name, and I know it is. is. is. circled Insert the verses here is. (Insert the verses here) “In Dim and Fitful Visions They Flit Across the Distances.” Distances.” single rule Distances.” triple rule In Memory of Olivia Olivia Susan Olivia Susan Clemens Clemens single rule Clemens double rule Departed this life August 18, 1896. 1896. single rule 1896. double rule “I am old, poor lady. If sympathy of one whose years—” “Experience is age; not years! Your face is ignorantly smooth, and ignorantly pink; You have lived long, and nothing suffered. You try to pity me, I see the good intent, I know it is your best; But how shall you pay out in coin What yet lies bedded in your ores? The fires of grief—they lap the heart in flame, They smelt the red gold free! It is the bleeding heart That pays the due of woe in metal fire-assayed,— Not kindly-meaning paper Drawn upon an unexploited mine mine treasure mine Which one may find some day in case by malice of the fates Misfortune shall so order it.” She dreamed a moment in her past, With absent look, and mumbled, in her pain, “Oh, I am old in grief—so old!” And presently began The story of her wounds, as one who muses to himself, Scarce knowing that he speaks: “My curly-headed fay! fay! thing!— fay! My baby girl—how long ago that was!— ’Tis five and twenty years—an age! ’Tis five and twenty years—an age! O, many a year ago!— ’Tis five and twenty years—an age! “There sat I, thinking of my happiness, The riches garnered in my heart, my hopes Fulfilled beyond my dreams, and wondering If any in the world knew such content as I: “And now, from out my veiling lids I caught a flash of sun-lit golden hair, But kept the secret to myself. I knew the game: A bear was lurking there, I knew it well, And knew its ways. All stealthily it crept In shadow and concealment of the wood— (Which others thought a sofa of the horse-hair type)— Until it gained the nearest coign of vantage: Then—out it burst upon me with a roar, and I Collapsed in fright!— fright!— fright!;— which was my part to play. “O, I can see my darling yet: the little form In slip of flimsy stuff all creamy white, Pink-belted waist with ample bows, Blue shoes scarce bigger than the housecat’s housecat’s house-cat’s ears— Capering in delight and choked with glee To see me so becrazed with fright. “Then “Then —¶ “Then suddenly the laughter ceased— ceased— ceased:— Drowned, dear heart, in penitential tears— She flew to me and hugged me close, And kissed my eyes and face and mouth, And soothed away my fears with anxious words, ‘Look ‘Look “‘Look up, mamma mamma mama , don’t cry; it’s not a real bear, it’s only me.’ “Ah me, ah me, how could I know That I should look upon her face no more!” “Poor soul! She died? That very day?” “No. Lost, I think—or stolen away; We never knew.” It smote me cold; it smote me dumb; There were no words to say. She noted not Or if I spoke or no, but drifted on Along her tale of griefs—that weary road The wretched travel day and night, From eve to dawn and dawn to eve again, Whilst happier mortals toil or sleep: “No, I have not been spared. So long ago it seems an age, misfortune came again. ’Tis sixteen years. Could I forget the count? Ah, no, ah, no. ’Tis . . . no. ’Tis . . . no. The dearest little maid—scarce ten years old— How strange it was—how strange—how strange! “It was a summer afternoon; the hill Rose green above me and about, and in the vale below The distant village slept, and all the world Was steeped in dreams. Upon me lay this peace, And I forgot my sorrow in its spell. And now My little maid passed by, and she Was deep in thought upon a solemn thing: A disobedience, and my reproof. Upon my face She ‘must ‘must “must not look until the day was done;’ done;’ done;” For she was doing penance. . . . She? O, it was I! What mother knows not that? And so she passed, I worshiping and longing. . . . It was not wrong? You do not think me wrong? I did it for the best. Indeed I meant it so. And it was done in love—not passion; no, But only love. You do not think me wrong? ’Twould comfort me to think I was not wrong. . . . If I had spoken! If I had known—if I had only known! “As then she was, I see her still; And ever as I look, awake or in my dreams, She passes by. Unheeding me, she passes by! “By duty urged, I checked the hail all charged with love That burned upon my tongue, and let her pass unwelcomed— Sat worshiping, and let her pass unwelcomed. . . . Ah, how was I to know that doom was in the air! “She flits before me now: The peach-bloom gown of gauzy crêpe, The plaited tails of hair, The ribbons floating from the summer hat, The grieving face, droop’d droop’d droope’d head absorbed with care. care. care—. O, dainty little form!— O, dainty little form!— O, dainty little form!— I see it move, receding slow slow slow, along the path, By hovering butterflies besieged besieged besiged ; I see it reach The breezy top and show clear-cut against the sky. . . . Then pass beyond and sink from sight—forever!” “To death?” “God knows. But lost to me; To come no more, to bless my eyes no more in life. Where now she wanders—if she wander still and live— That shall I never know. . . . And there is yet Another.” “Gone?” “Taken while I stood and gazed!” “O, pitiful!” “In presence of a hundred friends She vanished from my eyes! In my own house It was. Within, was light and cheer; without, A blustering winter’s night. There was a play; It was her own; for she had wrought it out, Unhelped, from her own head—and she But turned sixteen! A pretty play, All graced with cunning fantasies, And happy songs, and peopled all with fays, And silvan gods and goddesses, And shepherds, too, that piped and danced, And wore the guileless hours away In care-free romps and games. “Her girlhood mates played in the piece, And she as well: a goddess, she,— And looked it, as it seemed to me. “ ’Twas fairyland restored—so beautiful it was And innocent. It made us cry, we elder ones, To live our lost youth o’er again With these its happy heirs. “Slowly, at last, the curtain fell. Before us, there, she stood, all wreathed and draped In roses pearled with dew—so sweet, so glad, So radiant!—and —and And —and flung us kisses through the storm Of praise that crowned her triumph. . . . O, Across the mists of time I see her yet, My Goddess of the Flowers! . . . . “The curtain hid her. . . . Do you comprehend? Till time shall end! Out of my life she vanished while I looked! . . . . “Ten “Ten “Seven “Ten years are flown. O, I have watched so long, So long. But she will come no more. . . . No more. No, she will come no more.” She sobbed, and dumbly moaned, a little time, I silent, wanting words to comfort griefs like these; Then, sighing, took she up her tale again: “Yet “Yet “ “Yet even this I over-lived And in my heart of hearts gave thanks That of my jewels one was left, That of my jewels still the richest one Was spared me to delight my eye And light the darkness of my days. “My idol, she! I hugged her to my dreading soul—my precious one!— one!— one”!— And daily died with fear. For now, To me all things were terrors, that before Were innocent of harm: the rain, the snow, the sun— I blenched if they but touched her. “O, tall and fair and beautiful she was! was! was! And all the world to me, oh, all the world! And all the world to me, and I to her. In her I lived, And she in me. We were not two, but one. And it was little like the common tie that binds The mother and the child, but liker that Which binds two lovers: The hours were blank when we were separate; The time was heavy and the sun was cold, Life lost its worth. And when the blank was past, And we drank life again from out each other’s eyes And lips and speech—oh, heaven itself could nothing add To that contenting joy! . . . “I would you could have seen her. If you, a stranger . . . But you will never see her now; Nor I—oh, never more! . . . . “How beautiful she was! Not outwardly alone,—within, as well. Her spirit Answered to her face, her mind ennobled both. . . . And now. . . . O, now to know that in that wonder-working intellect The light is quenched, the cunning wheels are still, The eyes that spoke, the voice that charmed, Have ceased from their enchantments! . . . . “How dear she was! how full of life! A creature made of joyous fire and flame and impulse— A living ecstasy! Ah who could dream That she could die? . . . Two years—two little years ago. . . . “It seems so strange. . . . so strange . . . Struck down unwarned! In the unbought unbought ◇ unbought grace of youth laid low— In the glory of her fresh young bloom laid low— In the morning of her life cut down! “And I not by! Not by When the shadows fell, the night of death closed down, The sun that lit my life went out. Not by to answer When the latest whisper passed the lips That were so dear to me—my name! Far from my post! the world’s whole breadth away. O, sinking in the waves of death she cried to me For mother-help, and got for answer— Silence!” “O, you wring my heart! God pity you, poor lady! God pity you, and grant That this hard stroke shall be the last That in His providence—” I stopped—rebuked by something in her face. She drifted into dreams— dreams— dreams;— she did not hear; Her thoughts were far away, Wandering among the ruins of her life. Then presently she muttered to herself, “All gone. All; and she, the last, my joy, my pride, my solace— Dead. Dead, in the perfected flower of her youth.” She rose, and went her way. I questioned one who seemed to know her, and he said, “Poor lady, she is mad. She is bereft of four, she thinks. There was but one.” Ah Ah “Ah , God! And yet, poor broken heart, she said the truth! We that are old—we comprehend; even we That are not mad: whose grown-up scions still abide, Their tale complete: Their earlier selves we glimpse at intervals Far in the dimming past; We see the little forms as once they were, And whilst we ache to take them to our hearts, The vision fades. We know them lost to us— Forever lost; we cannot have them back; We miss them as we miss the dead, We mourn them as we mourn the dead. S. L. C. S. L. C. S. L. C. [paraph] York Harbor, August 18, 1902. After my wife’s death, June 5, 1904, I experienced a long period of unrest and loneliness. Clara and Jean were busy with their studies and their labors, and I was washing about on a forlorn sea of banquets and speech-making in high and holy causes—industries which furnished me intellectual cheer and entertainment, but got at my heart for an evening only, then left it dry and dusty. I had reached the grandpapa stage of life; and what I lacked and what I needed, was grandchildren, but I didn’t know it. By and by this knowledge came by accident, on a fortunate day, a golden day, and my heart has never been empty of grandchildren since. No, it is a treasure-palace of little people whom I worship, and whose degraded and willing slave I am. In grandchildren I am the richest man that lives to-day: for I select my grandchildren, whereas all other other others other grandfathers have to take them as they come, good, bad and indifferent. The accident I refer to, was the advent advent advents advent of Dorothy Butes, fourteen fourteen 14 years old, who wanted to come and look at me. Her mother brought her. There was never a lovelier child. English, with the English complexion; and simple, sincere, frank and straightforward, as became her time of life. This was more than two years ago. She came to see me every few weeks, until she returned to England eight months ago. Since then, we correspond. My next prize was Frances Nunnally, schoolgirl schoolgirl school-girl , of Atlanta, Georgia, whom I call Francesca for short. I have already told what pleasant pleasant delightful delightful pleasant times we had together every day in London, last summer, returning calls. She was sixteen sixteen 16 then, a dear sweet grave little body, and very welcome in those English homes. She will pay me She will pay me [¶] My third prize She will pay me She will pay me a visit six weeks hence, when she comes North with her parents Europe-bound. She is a faithful correspondent. My third prize was Dorothy Quick—ten years and ten-twelfths of a year old when I captured her at sea last summer on the return-voyage from England. What a Dorothy it is! How many chapters have I already talked about her, and about her, and about her, and about not in her bright and booming and electrical ways, and her punctuationless literature and her adorably lawless spelling? Have I exhausted her as a text for talk? No. Nobody could do it. At least nobody nobody nobdody nobody who worships her as I worship her. She is eleven years and nearly eight-twelfths of a year old, now, and just a dear! She was to come to me as soon as I should get back from Bermuda, but she has an earlier grandpa grandpa grandpa grandpapa , and he is leaving for Europe next Monday morning, and naturally he had to have the last of her before sailing. Is she still her old self, and is her pen characteristically characteristically still characteristically characteristically brisk and her spelling and punctuation undamaged by time and still my pride and delight? Yes: Yes: Yes: (Insert letter) Yes: Dear Dear monogram: Q [¶] Dear Mr Clemens I am very glad you are home and I am so glad I am to see you on Monday I will not be able to come Monday Morning but will come on the one-nine train I will be so glad to see you I am sorry not being able to be with you on Saturday but I really want to be with grandpa and now I must close. with love to you and miss Lyon Your loving Dorothy P.S. Grandpa is going away that is why I must be with him on sunday Dorothy Next is Margaret—Margaret Blackmer, New York, twelve twelve 12 years old last New Year’s. She of the identification-shell. (See a previous chapter.) Those shells were so frail and delicate that they could not endure exposure on a watch-chain, therefore we have put them safely and sacredly away and hung gold shells enameled with iridescent shell-colors on our watch-chains to represent them and do the identifying with. Margaret’s father will bring her down from her school at Briarcliff on the Hudson six six on six six days hence to visit me—as I learn per her letter of five days ago—and then she will go with me to a play at the Children’s Theatre, where, as Honorary President of that admirable institution, I am to say a few words. Next is Irene—Irene Gerken Gerken Gherken Gerken , of 75th 75th 75th, 75th street street street Street , New York, that beautiful and graceful and altogether wonderful child—I mean fairy—of twelve twelve 12 summers. To-morrow she will go to a matinée with me, and we are to play billiards the rest of the day. In Bermuda, last January, we played much billiards together, and a certain position of the balls is still known by her name there. When her ball backed itself against the cushion and became thereby nearly unusable, she was was always was was never embarrassed by that defect but always knew how to remedy it: she just moved it out to a handier place, without remark or apology and blandly fired away! Down there, now, when a ball lies glued to a cushion, gentlemen who have never seen that child lament and say, “O no ¶ “O “O no ¶ “O corrected miswriting [¶] “O , hang it, here’s another Irene!” Next is Hellen Hellen Helen Martin, of Montreal, Canada, a slim and bright and sweet little creature aged ten and a half years. Next is Jean Spurr, aged thirteen thirteen 13 the 14th of last March, and of such is the kingdom of Heaven Heaven hHeaven Heaven . Next is Loraine Allen, nine and a half years old, with the voice of a flute and a face as like a flower as can be, and as graciously and enchantingly beautiful as ever any flower was. Next is Helen Allen, aged thirteen thirteen 13 , native of Bermuda, perfect in character, lovely in disposition, and a captivator captivator captivater at sight! Next—and last, to date—is Dorothy Sturgis, aged sixteen sixteen 16 , of Boston. This is the charming child mentioned in yesterday’s chapter when I was talking about Lord Grey. On the voyage we were together at the stern watching the huge waves lift the ship skyward then drop her, most thrillingly H—alifaxward, when one of them of vast bulk of vast bulk of vast bulk of vast bulk leaped over the taffrail and knocked us down and buried us under under until under under several tons of salt water. The papers, from one end of America to the other, made a perilous and thundersome event of it, but it wasn’t that kind of a thing at all. Dorothy was not discomposed, nobody was hurt, we changed our clothes from the skin outward, and were on deck again in half an hour. In talking In talking In talk In talking corrected miswriting In talking of Dorothy yesterday I referred to her as one of my “angel-fishes.” All the ten schoolgirls schoolgirls school-girls in the above list are my angel-fishes angel-fishes angel-fishes angel-fishes , and constitute my Club, whose name is “The Aquarium,” and contains no creature but these angel-fishes and one slave. I am the slave. The Bermudian angel-fish, with its splendid blue decorations, is easily the most beautiful fish that swims, I think. So I thought I would call my ten pets angel-fishes angel-fishes angel-fishes angel-fishes , and their Club Club club the Aquarium. The Club’s Club’s club’s badge is the the the the angel-fish’s splendors reproduced in enamels and mounted for service as a lapel-pin—at least that is where the girls wear it. I get these little pins in Bermuda; they are made in Norway. A year or two ago I bought a lovely piece of landscape of 210 acres in the country near Redding, Connecticut, and John Howells, the son of his father, is building a villa villa large villa large villa there for me. We’ll spend the coming summer summer summer summer in it. it. it. I have never been to that region, but the house is so lauded by Clara and Miss Lyon that I am becoming anxious to see it. it. I have never been to that region, but the house is so lauded by Clara and Miss Lyon that I am becoming anxious to see it. The billiard room will will is large, and will (MS1) is large, and will have the legend “The Aquarium” over its door, for it is to be the Club’s official headquarters. headquarters. headquarters. I have good photographs of all my fishes, and these will be framed and hung around the walls. headquarters. I have good photographs of all my fishes, and these will be framed and hung around the walls. There is an angel-fish bedroom—double-bedded—and I expect to have a fish and her mother in it as often as Providence will permit. permit. permit. [¶] And then—but I must stop, and answer my Boston Dorothy’s letter. circled (Go right on to page 13 permit. There’s a letter from the little Montreal Hellen Hellen Helen . I will begin an answer now, and finish it later: I miss you, dear Hellen Hellen Helen . I miss Bermuda too, but not so much as I miss you; for you were rare, and occasional, and select, and Ltd., whereas Bermuda’s charms and graciousnesses were free and common and unrestricted,—like the rain, you know, which falls upon the just and the unjust alike; a thing which would not happen if I were superintending the rain’s affairs. No, I would rain softly and sweetly upon the just, but whenever I caught a sample of the unjust outdoors outdoors out-doors I would drown him. Reverend Twichell is coming down from Hartford, and I will send him a word of welcome right now: will send . . . now: have been writing him: will send . . . now: will send . . . now: I I “I ‘solid’ written in the margin I letter typed with single line spacing am glad, Joe—uncommonly glad—for you will tell me about the “new movement” up your way which your clergy have been importing from Boston. Something of it has reached me, and has filled me to the eyelids with irreverent laughter. You will tell me if my understanding of the New Movement is correct: to wit to wit to-wit , that it is just Christian Science, with some of the ear-marks ear-marks ear-marks ear-marks painted over and the others removed, after the fashion of the unanointed cattle-thieves cattle-thieves cattle-thiefves cattle-thieves of the wild, wild West. My word, how ecclesiastical history do repeat herself! The Jews steal a God and a Creation and a Flood and a Moral Code from Babylon; Egypt steals the like from a forgotten Antiquity; Greece steals the swag from Egypt; Rome steals it from Greece; Christianity comes belated along and steals morals and miracles and one thing and another from Budh and Confucius; Christian Science arrives and steals the Christian outfit and gives it a new name; and now at last comes the Boston puritan—hater of Christian Christian S Christian Christian Science—and steals the plunder anew, and re-baptizes re-baptizes re-baptises it, and shouts tearful and grateful glory to God for winking at the mulct and not letting on—according to His shady custom these thirty million years. Oh yes, I am aware that the Science was emptying New England’s churches, and that the wise recognized that something had got to be done or the Church must go out of business business B business business and put up its pulpits at auction; I am aware that the peril was forestalled, and how; I am aware that the peril was forestalled, and how; I am aware that the peril was forestalled, and how; I am aware not in that Christian Science, disguised and new-named, has arrived in Hartford and is being preached and thankfully welcomed—where? In the most fitting of all places: the Theological Factory, which was largely built out of stolen money. Money stolen from me by that precious Christian, Newton Case, and his pals of the American Publishing Company. Oh Oh “Oh Oh , dear Joe, why doesn’t somebody write a tract on “How to Be Be Become Be a Christian and yet keep your Hands off of Other People’s Things.”