17 July 1906 New York, July 17, 1906 Five or six weeks ago, when I was dictating those chapters of this autobiography which which which will which detail my disastrous adventures with Charles H. Charles H. Charles H. Charles H. Webb, my first publisher; publisher; publisher,; comma mended to a semicolon publisher; the American Publishing Company, my second publisher; publisher; publisher,; comma mended to a semicolon publisher; and Charles L. Webster, my third publisher, I was by no means suspecting suspecting exsuspecting suspecting that I was on the eve of a disastrous adventure with still another publisher, the great corporation of Harper and Brothers. Perhaps disastrous is not just the term for this last adventure; adventure; adventure,; but comma mended to a semicolon adventure; possibly possibly ridiculous is the better word. There was a sort of dignity about my adventure with Elisha Bliss, junior junior Jr. , of the American Publishing Company, in 1872, but but and but but that quality is quite lacking in this present one with Harper and Brothers. Bliss, Bliss, Bliss, Bliss, in beguiling me into the belief that in changing the agreed wording of the contract for “Roughing It” from “half “half “half “half profit over and above cost of manufacture” manufacture” manufacture” manufacture” to a specified royalty, royalty, royalty was setting a trap for me, whereby he expected to rob me of about thirty thousand dollars thirty thousand dollars $30,000. $30,000 , a trick which succeeded, as I have already explained. There was a sort of dignity about that, that, that, that, for the reason that thirty thousand dollars thirty thousand dollars $30,000. $30,000 was a great sum of money to that poor little publishing company, and worth the sinful trouble which Bliss took to acquire it. In the present instance, the trap which Mr. Duneka set for me could result in a pecuniary advantage to Harper and Brothers of only ten or twelve thousand dollars, I imagine, and therefore, as I have suggested, the trick lacked dignity. My experiences experiences experience with Webb, and Bliss, and Webster stand as abiding proof that when it comes to examining a contract and understanding it, I am an incapable. I have shown that I misread and misunderstood those those theose those contracts in every instance. My present experience is excellent evidence that I have no more ability in understanding a contract to-day than I had then. I wonder who is really the man hurt in a swindle— swindle— swindle-— swindle— eventually: the perpetrator of it or the confiding ass who suffers from it? it? it.? period mended to a question mark it? Bliss captured my thirty thousand dollars thirty thousand dollars $30,000. $30,000 , but but and but but I made it cost him a quarter of a million thirteen years afterward. However, never mind this conundrum, I must get to the beginning of my subject. The beginning was three years ago. I was anxious to get my books concentrated in one publisher’s hands. The Harpers had half of them, and the American Publishing Company had the other half. Collier wanted to publish a cheap edition of them by subscription, and he offered to guarantee a sale of forty thousand forty thousand 40,000 sets a year. A concentration of the books in one publisher’s hands I presently presently presently presently found to be impossible, but but and but but Duneka said that he would be quite willing to give Bliss the subscription rights in the Harper books if Bliss would give him in return the trade rights in the Bliss books. Duneka said that he had made this very offer to Bliss two years before. I said I didn’t see any reason why Bliss should not accept these terms. I placed the matter before Bliss, and at first he was willing, but when I went back to Duneka with that word, Duneka was no longer willing himself; he had heard of the Collier offer, and had changed his mind. That was my first experience of Mr. Duneka’s facility in going back on his word. At the end of 1902 I wrote some Christian Science articles, and published three of them in the North American Review North American Review North American Review . The rest of the articles were not to be published serially, but were to be joined to the first three and issued in book form; form; form,; comma mended to a semicolon form; and that announcement was made. Duneka had the remaining matter set up and forwarded to me in the form of galley-proofs galley-proofs galley proofs . I read and revised these and put the book in shape for the composing-room composing-room composing-room composing-room . I took it to Mr. Duneka; Duneka; Duneka,; and period mended to a semicolon Duneka; he did not break out into any enthusiasms enthusiasms enthusiasms enthusiasms about it, in fact he looked embarrassed. I inquired as to what might be the matter, and he developed the fact that he was afraid of the Christian Scientists. He said they were growing very strong, and would it be to my interest to publish such a book and antagonize this growing power? also, would it be to the interest of Harper and Brothers to antagonize that power? I said that if he was afraid, I didn’t wish to push a dangerous book upon him, and I would publish it elsewhere; but he said “No; No; No,; comma mended to a semicolon No; by no means no, if the book must be published, we wish to publish it ourselves.” ourselves.” ourselves”. ourselves.” But I said I didn’t want a publisher who was afraid, and I would rather take it elsewhere. Also, I said that my interest in a book lay in the writing of it, so it was not a matter of great consequence to me whether it was published or not. Let it be suppressed suppressed supressed suppressed . But how was it to be suppressed suppressed supressed suppressed ? The announcement had gone forth that it was to be published in book form at once. How was the suppression suppression supression suppression to be managed? Mr. Duneka said that that that that that would be very easy, not a line need go into print about it; that he would privately inform the trade that it was found that the book could not be issued in time for the spring trade, therefore its publication had been postponed until the fall. He said that by that time the trade would have forgotten that there was any such book, and we should not hear anything more about it. It was then agreed that Mr. Duneka should quiet the book down and prepare it for its grave without letting anything get into print about it. This was a distinct understanding, a plain and straightforward agreement, yet my back was hardly turned before before when before before a notice to this effect appeared in the Publishers’ Weekly Publishers’ Weekly Publishers’ Weekly of April 11th, 1903 1903 1902 : Neither Neither “Neither Harper and Brothers nor the North American Review North American Review North American Review will publish Mark Twain’s Christian Science book. All orders have been canceled. canceled. cancelled.” Only one interpretation can be put upon this language: language: language: language: that Harper and Brothers had refused my book, and were offensively proud of having done it. This was my second experience with Mr. Duneka as a promise-keeper. He probably supposed that I would never see that notice, and in fact it was not likely that I would see it; but a Pittsburgh bookseller sent it to me, and inquired why I had lost my grip and was afraid to issue the book. That was three years ago. Inquiries followed, followed, followed, followed, by letter, letter, letter, letter, from persons in this country and in England, and I explained to them that the publication of the book was not my affair, that it was in the hands of Harper and Brothers, and they could best explain why it was not issued. Then other letters began to come from these inquirers, which said that upon application to Harper and Brothers for an explanation of why the book was not issued, the reply was that I had desired them to suppress the book. I attributed all these slynesses to Mr. Duneka, who is the manager at Harpers, Harpers, Harper’s, Harper’s, and could tell the inquirers the truth if he wanted to, and could prevent the dissemination of spurious spurious the spurious spurious information if he so desired. The inquiries continued to come, and at last I suggested that perhaps it would be best to issue the book. Then Mr. Duneka had a happy idea, and said he would make that book volume volume Volume XXIV of my Collected Works Collected Works collected works , and sell and sell and in that form put it into the trade to and sell and sell it only to persons ordering to persons ordering as a to persons ordereding to persons ordering a whole set, and in that way no mention of the book would get into print, and no harm would be done. Mr. Duneka has reiterated his promise to get out of the scrape in that way several times. Up to date he has not kept his word, and I have never suspected him of intending to keep it. As late as three months ago, one of these inquiry-letters inquiry-letters inquiry-letters inquiry-letters came to me from England. I referred the writer to Harper and Brothers. They answered him, and promptly put the blame on me, me, me, me, as usual. Some time ago I wrote an unfriendly article about the Butcher, Butcher, Butcher, ‘B’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’, subsequently canceled butcher, King Leopold Leopold Leopold, Leopold of Belgium, and offered it to Mr. Duneka. He accepted it, and thought he ought to publish it as soon as possible, because he had employed Mr. Nevinson Nevinson Nevison to make a tour through Portuguese Africa Africa Africa, Africa and expose expose explain expose expose the cruelties cruelties horrors and cruelties cruelties which the Portuguese were perpetrating upon the helpless blacks there, and my article would have an opportunity to precede Mr. Nevinson’s Nevinson’s Nevison’s exposures and break the road in front of him. But the article did not appear. It continued to fail to appear, and kept on failing to appear. Finally, Mr. Nevinson’s Nevinson’s Nevison’s first article appeared, and the position was changed— changed— changed-— changed— he was breaking ground for me. I thought I knew what the trouble was. Mr. Duneka is a Roman Catholic, and anything like a criticism of that Church Church church , or of an individual connected with it, gives Mr. Duneka the dry gripes. Finally, I asked him when that article was going to appear. He explained that Mr. Nevinson’s Nevinson’s Nevison’s articles were ended now, and it would be very bad policy to follow them with my article, article, article, article, because I would overshadow him and blot him out. This was very complimentary, but I was not fishing for compliments, and it was not altogether satisfactory. When Mr. Duneka needs a pretext for not doing a thing he is handy in finding one. When time and circumstances take the tuck out of and circumstances take the tuck out of removes and circumstances take the tuck out of and circumstances take the tuck out of that pretext, he is handy in finding a fresh one a fresh one one a fresh one a fresh one to take its place. I have noticed these ingenuities more than once, and have admired them. It was plain that Mr. Duneka was afraid of that article. He is interesting. He grows more and more interesting every day. He has inspirations which could enter no human head but his own. A short story called “A Horse’s Tale,” Tale,” Tail”, Tale,” Tale,” which will begin in the August number number Nnumber ‘N’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ number of Harper’s Magazine Harper’s Magazine Harper’s Magazine , has for its principal stage the bull ring in Spain. In the proof sheets Mr. Duneka suggested that we change Spain to Mexico, and have the performance there. The fact that the performance could not perform in Mexico Mexico Spain (Mexico?) Mexico with any considerable effect considerable effect considerable effect whatever considerable effect did not trouble Mr. Duneka. What he was shuddering about was that in the story the Spanish priests hurried through their sacred functions on Sundays in order to get to the bull ring in time to see the butcheries. The fact that this was merely a fact and not an invention could not reconcile Mr. Duneka to its publication. I judge that that was the trouble with him; he did not explain what the trouble was. There could be nothing else in the story that could explain his attitude. I have half a a a a dozen novels half finished, and now and then as the years go by I add a chapter or two to one or another of them as the notion strikes me, and if I live forty years I shall finish several of the several of the several of these several of the six. Last summer, Mr. Duneka wanted to look at one of these stories, a story whose scene is laid in the Middle Ages, and in it he found a drunken and profane Catholic priest—a spectacle priest—a spectacle priest, —an spectacle priest—a spectacle which was as common in Europe four hundred years ago as Dunekas are Dunekas are I vun it is Dunekas are Dunekas are in hell to-day. Of course it made him shudder, and he wanted that priest reformed or left out. Mr. Duneka seems to do four-fifths of the editing of everything that comes to Harper and Brothers for publication, and he certainly certainly certainly certainly has a good literary instinct and judgment judgment judgement judgment as long as his religion does not get into his way. My experience has taught me that Mr. Duneka’s statements are not valuable, that his promises are not to be relied upon, and that he is very timid, even pathetically timid; but that he would set a trap for me, and try to cheat me out of a small sum of money is a new departure in his character. I never suspected him of any disposition to pick my pocket, pocket, pocket, pocket, until now. My contract with the Harpers of three years ago puts all my books permanently in their possession; possession; possession,; comma mended to a semicolon possession; not only my old books, but also any new books which I may write. The old books are are I are are listed in that contract, and among them appears “Mark Twain’s Library of Humor.” The Harpers pay me one and the same one and the same one and the same one and the same royalty upon all those those the those those old books (20 per cent). Now Now Now faintly typed ‘w’ retraced in ink Now if Harper and Brothers choose to renew the dress of any renew the dress of any resurrect any renew the dress of any renew the dress of any one of these old books and put it on the market, they do not have to ask me for permission; they can can could can can do it without saying anything to me. They would only need to pay me the 20 per cent royalty. They could issue the old “Library of Humor” “Library of Humor” “Library of Humor” “Library of Humor” without saying anything to me about it, though they would know when they did it that I would be very much obliged to them if they did nothing of the kind. I made up that book a good many years ago, at a time when I thought that such a book would be valuable and popular. I took the utmost pains with its preparation. I also paid out money in order that the work might be well done—five thousand dollars done—five thousand dollars done-—$5,000 done—$5,000 . I got two experts to help me, Mr. Howells and Charles Hopkins Clark Clark Clarke , now editor of the Hartford Courant. Courant. “Courant”. “Courant.” I bought all the humorous humorous nhumeorous humorous books I could find. Mr. Clark Clark Clarke read them carefully through, marking each article with a capital “A,” or “B,” or “C,” according to whether it was his first, second, or third choice. Then Mr. Howells went over the indicated articles, and marked his first and second choice. Then I went over them myself and made the final choice. A great deal of honest work was expended upon the book. It has lain out of print now for as many many much many many as seven years, and I have had no desire to see it dug dug picked dug dug up and sent adrift again. Mr. Duneka said that he had heard that a “pirate” “pirate” “pirate” “pirate” out West West west was going to republish republish re-publish marked to close up republish the book, book, book, book, on the plea that its abandonment for so many years had nullified the copyright. Therefore, he thought we ought to beat that game by “ostensibly” “ostensibly” “ostensibly” ‘ostensibly’ underscored “ostensibly” republishing republishing re-publishing marked to close up republishing the book ourselves, ourselves, ourselves, ourselves, in the interest of my reputation, and beat that “pirate.” He told me that we should only need we should only need all that would be necessary to do, would be we should only need we should only need to set up that old book again (the plates were long ago destroyed), and issue it in some exceedingly cheap form, and make a merely “ostensible” “ostensible” “ostensible” ‘ostensible’ underscored “ostensible” publication of it (not a real publication), publication), publication-), publication), put a few copies on sale, and this game would beat the “pirate.” “pirate.” “pirate”. “pirate.” I said “Go ahead and do it,” for I was not aware that I was now dealing with a “pirate” close at home. I thought he proposed to make it a fifty-cent fifty-cent 50-cent book in paper covers. I cannot swear that he said that, but I can swear that that was the impression which he gave me, and I know that he intended intended intended ‘intended’ underscored intended to give me that impression. Then he said that that that that as there was “no “no “no “no money in the book for either of us” us” us” us” (those are his words), words), words), words), he would not be able to pay me much of a royalty. I said I was indifferent as to that—make that—make that-—make that—make the royalty what he pleased. He suggested 3 per cent. I wrote him and consented to that. wrote him and consented to that. said “Go on, that will do”. wrote him and consented to that. wrote him and consented to that. By and by By and by Bye and bye he sent me a paper to sign, and of course I signed it; it; it,; comma mended to a semicolon it; also, of course, I did just as I did with those ancient publishers: publishers: publishers.: publishers: read it without studying it; it; it; - it; that would inevitably happen, particularly with Mr. Duneka, whose honesty I had not doubted. doubted. doubted. followed by a canceled caret doubted. I made several contracts with Bliss after the fatal one, but I was always suspecting him then, and I examined those those theose those contracts very carefully; but I don’t examine contracts carefully when I think I am dealing with a with a with a ‘witha’ marked to insert space with a man who is clean and honest. I shall be ready for Mr. Duneka next time. I shall be ready for Mr. Duneka next time. I shall be ready for Mr. Duneka next time. I shall be ready for Mr. Duneka next time. This paper which I signed had one detail in it which I did not notice, and to which I would have attached no importance if I had noticed it. That detail privileges Mr. Duneka to add some new matter to that old book and “bring “bring “bring “bring it up to date.” date.” date.” date.” If I had been suspecting Mr. Duneka, Duneka, Duneka, Duneka, that might have made me stop and think, and also wonder why you want want want ‘want’ underscored want new matter in a book which is not really being published, but only “ostensibly” “ostensibly” “ostensibly” “ostensibly” published? published? published.? published? why you want want want ‘want’ underscored want to bring a book “up to date” “up to date” “up to date” “up to date” when there is “no money in it for either of us”? us”? us”,? us”? but, as I say, I never noticed that phrase, and if I had noticed it, I should have thought it was only one of Mr. Duneka’s heaven-sent heaven-sent heaven-sent heaven-sent inspirations and had nothing in it. About the end of last April, Mr. Duneka began to vomit “Libraries of Humor” “Libraries of Humor” “Libraries of Humor” “Libraries of Humor” upon the public, and by and by by and by bye amd bye bye and bye I noticed two things: things: things;: things: that these libraries were not not ‘not’ underscored not my old book, and that the price was not not ‘not’ underscored not cheap. Before I could rise to the size of the game Mr. Duneka was playing, playing, playing, playing, he had spewed out three of these volumes and was ready to spew another. I have never examined one of these books further than to read through the Table of Authors who had furnished the material. I saw that they were modern modern mode◇rn marked to close up modern authors. It may turn out that Mr. Duneka has put in one, or two, or three articles from the old book, but if this is true, it is neither according to the original agreement between him and me, nor in accordance in accordance in accordance in accordance with the paper which I signed. He has advertised the book largely, enthusiastically enthusiastically enthusiastically enthusiastically , shoutingly. He has called it which it is not not ‘not’ underscored not . He has advertised me as being the “editor” “editor” “editor” ‘editor’ underscored “editor” of it, whereas I had nothing to do with its construction, nor have I ever edited a line of it. When an author is wholly unknown, unknown, unknown, unknown, his royalty is, as a rule, 10 per cent; cent; cent,; comma mended to a semicolon cent; when he is better known it reaches 15 per cent; cent; cent,; comma mended to a semicolon cent; and when he is widely known it is 20 per cent. If If If faintly typed ‘f’ retraced in ink If Mr. Duneka had published the old book as it stood, without speaking to me, our contract would oblige him to pay me 20 per cent; cent; cent,; comma mended to a semicolon cent; but he shrewdly beguiled me into the notion that the book was not being really published published ‘published’ underscored published , that there was “no “no “no “no money in it for his house or for me,” me,” me,” me,” and that therefore, in the circumstances, 3 per cent would be enough to pay me. I didn’t care whether he paid me any per cent or not, any per cent or not, one half per cent, any per cent or not, any per cent or not, I was not interested in the matter; but if he had come to me and said that he proposed to get up a “Library of Humor” “Library of Humor” “lLibrary of Humor” “Library of Humor” himself, a new one, full of fresh matter, and that he would like to get me to put my name to it as the constructor and editor of it; it; it,; comma mended to a semicolon it; and that he that he that he that he was going to advertise it largely, charge six dollars six dollars $6.00 for it, (which is double the price of my old “Library”), (which is double the price of my old “Library”), (which is double the price of my old “Library”), (which is double the price of my old “Library”), and sell as many sets as he could, would he venture to venture to venture to venture to ask me to accept 3 per cent royalty as pay for pay for pay for pay for my share of this contemptible crime, this contemptible crime, this contemptible crime, this contemptible crime, this bare-faced proposal to swindle the public with a book which was not mine in any sense? sense? sense. ? period mended to a question mark sense? It is unbelievable. If I try to imagine Macmillan, or Macmillan, or Putnam, Macmillan, or Macmillan, or Scribner, or Doubleday, Doubleday, Doubleday, Page and Company, Doubleday, or any other respectable publisher, publisher, publisher, publisher, proposing to me to let him him me him him put my name on a book which I did not make, and accept of 3 per cent royalty, or 10 per cent, or 20 per cent, or 100 per cent, I find myself unable to conceive of such a romance. None of these publishers would think of asking me me me, or any other author, known or unknown, me to assume the fatherhood of a book which I I ◇ I I was neither to prepare nor to edit, and accept eighteen cents as my reward out of a selling price of six dollars six dollars $6.00 . I have directed Mr. Duneka, through my legal counsel, to suppress that fraudulent book at once, and stop robbing the public under my name, and he has promised to do so. The situation is unthinkably grotesque. unthinkably grotesque. unthinkable.y grotesque. unthinkably grotesque. The book has been out such a little while that the profit on it cannot have amounted to more than ten or twelve thousand dollars. Mr. Duneka would know that I would repudiate the book as soon as I recognized its character. He could hope to get nothing out of it but that ten or twelve thousand dollars, and he would then have to shelve it; and so, as I say, it is unthinkable that the manager of a millionaire concern like the Harper Corporation Corporation corporation would be willing to destroy the pleasant relations existing between the Corporation Corporation corporation and me for so small a sum as ten or twelve thousand dollars. It would seem that none but a fool would think of such an idea as that, and yet I may be mistaken— mistaken— mistaken-— mistaken— possibly it is wisdom wisdom wisdonm wisdom . In these days of big graft, and little little small little little graft, and universal graft, it is difficult to say what is wisdom and what isn’t. It is a marvelous spectacle, an incredible spectacle, this millionaire corporation filching pennies from its own child! It seems to me that this is reducing graft to its cheapest and meanest terms. It is . . . seems . . . terms. It is . . . is seems . . . terms. It is . . . seems . . . terms.