28 March 1907 Thursday, March 28, 1907 The Russian Count’s Count’s count’s luncheon at the St. Regis and his political speech in response to Mr. Clemens’s speech in behalf of the ladies present. It was my intention to continue and complete the list of important-unimportant happenings which have fallen to my share lately, and no longer ago than yesterday afternoon there was a basketful of them in my head, but to my astonishment they are all gone this morning, and the basket is empty. I am sorry, for as far as I had proceeded in recording them they were a revelation to me of what a diary is, and of necessity must be: fine and precious gold to-day, ashes, and valueless, to-morrow to-morrow to-morrow . Never mind—let it go. Yesterday I went to the plutocratic St. Regis Hotel to lunch with the Russian Count who dined with us a week ago. There were about thirty ladies and gentlemen present, all prominent people and all useful people; people not only distinguished for high place in society, but also for achievement—the women as well as the men. I knew nearly all of them, and the time passed very pleasantly. Toward the end of the function the Count did a rather startling thing; he sent a member of the Russian Embassy Embassy embassy to me to ask me to get up and make a speech. It was a startling proposition only because it came from the giver of the feast. Properly there could be but one text for a speech on such an occasion, and that text would be the host himself, and the speech an irruption of compliments to that person. By the custom of our country, some conspicuous guest does always use that text, and produce that kind of a speech, but he either does this of his own motion or at the suggestion of another guest; the suggestion never comes from the host. Some occult instinct seemed to inform me that I was in an embarrassing position, and so I thought it best to secure a moment or two in which to collect my judgment and determine what to do. Then the saving idea came to the rescue, and I went to the Count and said I was gratified by the honor which he had done me, but that it would not be quite properly deferential in me to take precedence of Mr. John Bigelow in so important a matter, I never having served a public office of any kind in my life, whereas Mr. Bigelow had represented the United States in ambassadorial capacities at foreign courts with high and memorable distinction; and I also observed that his age gave him another right of precedence over me, he being past ninety, and I only seventy-one—and so, for these various reasons, I ought to follow Mr. Bigelow, not precede him. I offered to go and say these things to Mr. Bigelow, and invite him, in the Count’s name, to speak. The Count thanked me, and I went to Mr. Bigelow with my mission. I can’t help admiring my smartness. It makes me proud every time I think of it—not because I was any smarter than usual, for I wasn’t; I am always smart. Let other people think as they may, I privately know that I am always smart, and as a rule considerably smarter than anybody else—but with this defect: that my smartness heretofore has always arrived a matter of twenty-four hours too late, when it couldn’t do any good, nor attract any attention, nor furnish me any self-admiration self-admiration self-admiration ; but this time I was smart right on the spot, and I couldn’t have been smarter if I had had a week to arrange the smartness in. I delivered the message to Mr. Bigelow, and his reply almost snuffed out my admiration of my own smartness, because of the suddenness of his responding smartness and the deep and wise and superior superior able superior character of it. His training as a diplomat showed out very conspicuously. Through my inexperience I had been caught unprepared, and had been stunned, and had been obliged to procrastinate and gain time in which to find out what I would better do; but his trained and educated sagacity sagacity experience sagacity had qualified him to be ready on the moment to meet any exigency, and he was ready this time. He reminded me that this Russian Count and Major General Major General major-general must naturally be on the imperial side in Russia’s present great quarrel with the people of Russia; that I was publicly known to be on the side of the revolutionists, where all right feeling Americans ought to be; that the imperialists and the revolutionists were laboring hard, both for the same object—to win the sympathies of the American people. He said, “It is possible that if you and I should speak the Count would use the opportunity to introduce Russian politics into his reply; then if his speech should get into print, it could make you and me seem to be in sympathy with the Czar’s side of the question, and certainly neither of us would enjoy that. I am not saying that the Count would would would ‘would’ underscored do this; I am only saying it is a possibility; but no matter, a possibility is enough; the barest possibility is argument enough and reason enough for you and me me I me to keep silent—but particularly me me I me . I have no text; I cannot speak without one. It is different with you; you are at your best when you haven’t a text and when you don’t know anything about the subject you are instructing your audience upon. I give you leave to speak, but you mustn’t by any accident make an opening for any political remarks in return. You may praise the Count himself, if you want to, but you are not to say anything about the Czar or the revolution—not even a word.” I went back to my place and reported results to the ladies in my neighborhood. They said it was quite too bad to leave the matter so; somebody ought to get up and say a pleasant thing about this sumptuous luncheon and pay the Count a handsome compliment or two, and that I ought to do it, and must do it. I said I had no text; that I could not do this complimenting on my own motion; it would be as difficult as it would be for me to get up and compliment myself—in fact more difficult, twice as difficult. They said, “But “But “but couldn’t you make the speech and the compliment in our behalf—in behalf of the ladies?” ladies?” ladies?” I said, “Certainly “Certainly “certainly , I can do that; that will be simple and easy, and I can do it with very real pleasure.” pleasure.” pleasure.” So I got up and made the speech. Of course it hadn’t a reference in it to the Czar, or to Russia, or to the Duma, or to the revolution, or to the daily slaughter of the helpless Jews that that infamous Government has been carrying on daily for two years. It confined itself strictly to the ladies, and their thanks. Then straightway the wisdom of that old diplomat was confirmed: the confirmed: the confirmed:! Tthe Count got up and made a political speech! speech! speech.! period mended to an exclamation point It was ludicrously out of harmony with the light stuff which I had been delivering there. It was odd enough to hear a man respond to a batch of gilded and lightsome personal compliments with a flowing stream of memorized adulations of the Russian Emperor Emperor emperor , and his great and good and divine nature and noble and beneficent intentions. Certainly a memorized speech can be a grotesque thing when you can’t know what sort of a speech it is destined to respond to. A practised practised practiced talker like Choate would make a memorized speech look convincingly as if every word of it had been suggested by some remark in the speech speech sentence speech which preceded it. Choate would have found a word somewhere in my speech—even if he had to invent that word himself and insert insert asinsert it—that would have made the Count’s speech look quite satisfactorily impromptu, but the Count lacked that art. Without a single preliminary word, and without a single reference to what I had been saying, he jumped right into his memorized adulations, and I think it was the funniest incident of the kind I have ever seen in an after-dinner experience of forty years. Mr. Clemens walks home from the St. Regis luncheon; on the way he thinks about the Christian Union article and wishes he had a copy of it; at 42d street a stranger puts the clippings concerning that article into his hand, saying he was just going to mail them to him. Some Mr. Clemens . . . 42d street . . . him. [¶] Some Thursday, March 28, 1907. Mr. Clemens . . . 42nd St. . . . him. [¶] Some dateline marked to precede ‘Some’ at 20.6 Thursday, March 28, 1907. Mr. Clemens . . . 42nd St. . . . him. [¶] Some [Thursday, March 28, 1907.] Some months ago I commented upon a chapter of Susy’s Biography wherein she very elaborately discussed an article about the training and disciplining of children, which I had published in the Christian Union, Christian Union, “Christian Union,” originally ‘Christian Union,’; underscore and comma canceled Christian Union, “Christian Union” (this was twenty-one years ago), an article which was full of worshipful praises of Mrs. Clemens as a mother, and which little Clara, and Susy, and I had been hiding from this lovely and admirable mother because we knew she would disapprove of public and printed praises of herself. herself. her.self. herself. At the time that I was dictating those those those these comments, several months ago, I was trying to call back to my memory some of the details of that article, but I was not able to do it, and I wished I had a copy of the article so that I could see what there was about it which gave it such large interest for Susy. Yesterday afternoon I elected to walk home from the luncheon at the St. Regis, which is in 55th street street Street and Fifth Avenue, for it was a fine spring day and I hadn’t had a walk for a year or two, and felt the need of exercise. As I walked along down Fifth Avenue the desire to see that Christian Union Christian Union “Christian Union” originally ‘Christian Union’; underscore canceled Christian Union “Christian Union” article came into my head again. I had just reached the corner of 42d street 42d street 42nd Street then, and there was the usual jam of wagons, carriages, and automobiles there. I stopped to let it thin out before trying to cross the street, but a stranger, who didn’t require as much room as I do, came racing by and darted into a crack among the vehicles and made the crossing. But on his way past me past me past me past me he thrust a couple of ancient newspaper clippings into my hand, and said, “There, you don’t know me, but I have saved them in my scrap-book for twenty years, and it occurred to me this morning that perhaps you would like to see them, so I was carrying them down town to mail them, I not expecting to run across you in this accidental way, of course; but I will give them into your own hands now. Good-bye Good-bye Good-bye! Good-bye Good-by! ”—and he disappeared among the wagons. Those scraps which he had put into my hand were ancient newspaper copies of that Christian Union Christian Union “Christian Union” originally ‘Christian Union’; underscore canceled Christian Union “Christian Union” article! article! article! article! It is a handsome instance of mental telegraphy—or if it isn’t that, it is a handsome case of coincidence.