9 April 1907 Dictated April 9, 1907 Dictated April 9, 1907 Dictated April 9, 1907. not in The “Wapping Alice” story. The “Wapping Alice” story. “WAPPING ALICE.” double rule written above the dateline Wapping Alice. triple rule I. triple rule The “Wapping Alice” story. rule At the banquet in honor of Ambassador Tower, last night, I encountered a guest, who who who said: who greeted me with a formula which I hear pretty often, particularly from elderly people— “You don’t remember me?” I confessed. Then he told me his name. The name did not help me, I still did did did did not remember him. He said he would give me a pointer: which he did with a remark in which he lightly dropped a name—“Wapping Alice.” Full lightly he dropped it, yes, but in my private breast it made a bang like a bombshell! I remembered him then; he was a minor character in a very dramatic episode which enacted itself in our house many many years ago ago ago ago in Hartford —twenty-seven, to be precise. It came back to me with a sharp and sudden vividness, and I saw the whole thing again, just as it had had had not in had happened so long ago; it flashed upon me bright and intense, like a midnight landscape revealed by a flood of lightning. I saw all the actors in the event, too, even to the clothes they wore, though they are all dead these many years, except this banquet-guest and me—yes, and one other. me—yes, and one other. me. me.—yes, and one other. I do not remember the real name of the Swede who figures in the drama, I only remember the fantastic name our servants furnished him with, but it will answer, for it is a plenty good enough name, for him or for for for forfor anybody else. The time was 1880. At the . . . was 1880. At the . . . was 1880. I will try to tell this story about as Jackson told it to me. We had been sailing the summer seas for many weeks, now, and the shell-removing influences had been putting in their work all that time. We had walked the decks together before meals, according to sea custom; played horse-billiards in the same team; dozed in company in the shade of the awnings; been partners at whist in the smoking-room, nights—and so-on and so-on; and now at last it was recognizable that the shell had wholly wasted away and disappeared. We knew it by this sign: the autobiographical stage had been reached. [¶] We were in the Indian Ocean. It was past midnight, the promenade deck was a solitude; the weather was soft and balmy; the sea was silver under the moon, there was not a ripple on it. The wise could not leave this heaven for bed; so we were still there, lounging in the rich passenger’s wonderful chairs, smoking the pipe of peace and contentment, and talking. [¶] Jackson was telling me his history. He was a southerner. His people had been planters, away back to Pocahontas’s time; their old plantation mansion was on the edge of a considerable town; their family had always occupied it, and had always kept it up to date in the matter of improvements and conveniences, whatever the date might chance to be. [¶] When Jackson had gotten pretty well along in his autobiographical sketch, he said: “And now I caome to the incident of Wapping Alice.” Theren he went on with his talk—about like this: It [¶] It From Chapter 42, Autobiography. | double rule | WAPPING ALICE. | double rule [¶] It SLC canceled this title again when he canceled the marginal notes he had written in the top margin [¶] It was on the 2d 2d 2d 2d 2nd of January of that year that we added Wapping Alice Alice Alice, an English girl, revised in pencil Alice to our household staff. According to her story she was born and reared in that part of London which is called Wapping,1880 1880 1879. 1879. 1880. inserted and boxed in the margins not in and the other servants soon got to calling her Wapping Alice to distinguish her from our other Alice, the colored cook. our other Alice, the colored cook. Patrick’s sister Alice, who was cook. our other Alice, the colored cook. revised in pencil our other Alice, the colored cook. She came to us fresh from England; she brought no no no us no recommendations, but we took her on her face. She soon made her way. She was good-hearted good-hearted good-hearted good-hearted and willing, she fitted neatly into her place, the children grew fond of her, everybody everybody everybody everybody ‘every body’ marked to close up on the place had a good word for her, and we were glad of the luck that threw her in our way. She was a little frisky with her frisky with her economical of her h’s frisky with her H’s frisky with her h’s, but that was nothing. nothing. a small matter and we soon got used to it and ceased to notice it. nothing. nothing. Some of the ridiculous features of the incident which I am going to speak of presently will be better understood if I expose Wapping Alice’s secret here and now, in the beginning—for she had a secret. It was this: she was not a woman at all, but a man. It is very creditable to his ingenuity that he was able to masquerade as a girl seven months and a half under all our eyes and never awake in us us us anything resembling a revised, and ‘s’ of ‘us’ retraced, in pencil us doubt or or or a revised in pencil or suspicion. It must not be charged that a part of the credit is due to our dulness; for no one can say that our friends and neighbors were dull people, and they were deceived as completely as we were. They knew Alice almost as well as we knew him, yet no suspicion of the fraud he was playing ever crossed their minds. He must have had years of apprenticeship in his part, or he could not have been so competent competent perfect in competent competent in it. Why he unsexed himself was was was was is his own affair. In the excitement of the grand climax in August the matter was overlooked and he was not questioned about it. For convenience, now, I will stop calling him “he.” Indeed, with that fair and modest and comely young creature framed framed in blossomy hat and fluttering ribbons and flowing gown framed framed in blossomy hat and fluttering ribbons and flowing gown framed framed before me now in the mirror of my memory, it is awkward and unhandy to call it anything but “she.” Wapping [¶] Wapping [¶] To take up begin my history. Wapping ‘take up’ revised to ‘begin’ in ink; sentence deleted in pencil no ¶ Wapping [¶] Wapping Alice took up her abode with us on the 2d 2d 2d 2d 2nd of January. The kitchen was an independent annex, built against the north side of the house; the house-entrance to to to of it was from the dining room. It consisted of two stories and a cellar; this latter was a laundry, and communicated with the house-cellar. It It It It The laundry also had a door which opened upon the steep hillside, above the brook. All about our house was open ground; so so so so it stood by itself. When it was locked up for the night, communication with the kitchen-annex was shut off, and the annex became in effect an independent establishment. After After W After After that, if the occupants of it wished wished wished wished wanted wished to indulge in privacies of their own they had their opportunity: we should know nothing about it. Wapping [¶] Wapping [¶] Wapping no ¶ Wapping Alice and the cook had adjoining bedrooms on the second floor of the annex, over the kitchen. At five five 5 five in the morning, February 2d 2d 2d 2d 2nd , the burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm let go with an urgent clatter, and I was out on the floor before I was awake. Before I was fairly into the bath-room bath-room bathroom bath-room the clatter stopped. I turned up the gas and looked at the annunciator. One of the metal tabs was down, and was still wagging with excitement. The number exposed by it indicated the laundry door which opened upon the hillside. That was a curious thing. What was there in the annex that a burglar burglar pe burglar burglar might want? And why should he want it so early in the morning? And the weather so bitter cold, too. Ought I to go all the way down there and inquire? My curiosity was strong, but not strong enough for that. I went back to bed, and reported progress. I said there was no present danger. We could wait, wait, wait, wait and listen for the alarm again. In case it should indicate should indicate should indicated revised in pencil should indicate that the burglar was breaking into the dining room, we could collect the children and climb out of the front window. Then we went to sleep. At five five 5 the next morning the alarm rang again. I went in the bath-room in the bath-room in the bath-room revised in pencil in the bath-room and looked, and it was the laundry door once more. At breakfast I told George about it. He could not account for it, but thought maybe Patrick Patrick Patrick Dennis Patrick Dennis Patrick had taken a notion to come at that strange strange strange strange hour and fertilize the furnace because of the exceeding sharpness of the weather. It turned out that Patrick Patrick Patrick Dennis Patrick Dennis Patrick had better sense. All the same the laundry rang us up at five five 5 5 o’clock on the succeeding on the succeeding on the succeeding on the next morning. The mystery was was made was was not wasted on the family; it made plenty of good good good good good talk for us at breakfast. And for George, too, of course; for whatever interested the rest of the rest of the rest of the not in family interested him, for that is the way with the colored servant servant brother servant brother servant when he is built in the right and usual way. Let Let Let Let ◇◇ me explain George—with just a word or two; otherwise you may presently think that my ways with him and his ways with me were not ceremonious enough, not distant enough. Put that all out of your mind, in justice to us both. Each Each W Each Each of us knew his place, place, place, place, place, quite well, and was in no danger of forgetting it. Let me throw some light—then you will understand: understand: understand: he was a hereditary servant— understand: He was a hereditary servant— understand: he was a hereditary servant— he was an institution—he was a part of us, not an excrescence—we had a great affection for him, and he for us; us; us— us—; when he said to people “my family” are well, or “my family” are away, now, “my family” are well, or “my family” are away, now, “my family” are well, or “my family” are away, now, “my family” are well, or “my family” are away, now, and so on so on so-on , he meant my family, not his. his. his. Consider this further light: my grand-|father owned his George’s grand-father, m my father owned George’s father, and George owned me—at any rate that is what the family said. his. Consider this further light: my grand-father owned George’s grand-father, my father owned George’s father, and George owned me—at any rate that is what the family said. his. Consider this further light: my grandfather owned George’s grandfather, my father owned George’s father, and George owned me—at any rate that is what the family said. But to go back to the breakfast-table discussion of that burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm matter. Let me . . . matter. Let me . . . matter. inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over Let me . . . matter. Wapping Alice was in the room during this discussion. After breakfast she asked George what a burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm might be. George explained it to her, and showed her how the opening of a door or a window would set it off. Well, the no ¶ Well, the [¶] The Well, tThe paragraph break deleted by the insertion laundry door troubled us no more. For a while we wondered at that; then the matter dropped out of our minds. The 9th 9th ninth of June we went away for the summer. Something more than two months afterward I happened to be within a hundred miles of home, and I thought I would run up and and and to and see how things were getting along there. I arrived in the gloaming and walked out from the station. On the way, a horse-car came loafing by, and a friend hailed me from its rear platform— me from its rear platform— me—from its rear patform— me from its rear platform— “I thought that would fetch you! you! you. you .! period mended to an exclamation point How much did they get?” “What do you mean?” “Don’t you know your house has been burglarized?” “No.” “George wanted it kept kept kept to be kept out of the papers— the papers— the paper,s and the papers,— the papers— so it didn’t get in; but but but but I supposed he telegraphed you you you for you .” “No, I haven’t haven’t haven’t hadn’t haven’t heard of it.” The The The When I arrived The house and the grounds had a lonesome and forsaken look. I rang, rang, rang, rang and got no answer. I walked all about the place, but found no one. The horses were in the stable, stable, stable, stable, but Patrick Patrick Patrick Dennis Dennis Patrick and his family were gone. I went back back back to the house back and was going to open the front door with a latch-key, but concluded to try the knob first. The door swung swung swung sprung swung open! It seemed an an an and odd state of things for a house that had so lately had experience of burglars. I went all over the house and the annex. Everything was in good order, but there were no human beings anywhere. So I lit up, in the library, and sat down to read and smoke, and wait. I waited until ten at night, then George arrived. When he opened the door and saw me and the other lights lights bright lights revised in pencil lights , he was astonished. “Why, when did you come, sir come, sir come, sir come, sir !” I answered with austerity austerity cold austerity austerity —meaning to impress him— him— George— George— him— “More than three hours ago—and found the house absolutely unprotected. The whole tribe away; no one left to take care of the place. What do you think of that kind of conduct? A burglar could have emptied the house, house, house, house, unmolested.” George was not impressed. He laughed a comfortable, care-free laugh, and said— “This house ain’t in no danger, Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, ‘Clemens’ restored with ‘STET’ Jackson, Clemens, don’t you worry. There ain’t a burglar that don’t know there’s a burglar alarm in this house. It’s business business f business business for them to know where there’s alarms, and they know it, where there’s alarms, and they know it, where there’s alarms, and they know it, it, you can ’pend upon that. No, sir, they don’t tetch no house that’s got a—” “Do you mean to say that you keep the alarm on on on on ‘on’ underscored , day and night both?” “No, sir, don’t keep it on at all, generally. all, generally. all., generally. all, generally. all, generally. Just the fact is a plenty. They ain’t going to meddle here.” “You think so, do you? Where have you all been?” “Been “Been “All b “Been “Been down the river on the excursion boat.” “All of you?” “Yes, sir, the whole bilin’.” “I think it’s scandalous. Even if there is a burglar alarm, I think you might at least lock the front door when you desert the house.” George smiled a a an irritatingly a a placid smile, and said, almost languidly— said, almost languidly— said, almost languidly— said,— almost languidly— “Well, now, we ain’t quite so far gone as all that, Mr. Clemens. Clemens. Clemens. Jackson. Jackson. Clemens. Whenever Whenever Whenever Whenever ‘When ever’ marked to close up we go we always lock the front door, and—” “George, I came in without a latch-key.” George caught his breath with a gasp, and reeled in his tracks. reeled in his tracks. he staggered where he stood. reeled in his tracks. reeled in his tracks. The next moment he was flying up stairs like a rocket. I was almost as much startled as he was. He was gone five minutes, then he came drooping into the room, limp and weak, and swabbing his face, which had paled to the hue of old amber. He came and leaned against the bookshelves bookshelves book shelves near me, and waited a little to get his breath, his breast rising and falling with his pantings. Then he gave his face a final wipe, and said— “My souls, Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson, Clemens, what a turn you did gimme! The front door not even on the latch, and fifteen hundred dollars hard-earned money up there betwixt my mattresses mattresses mattrasses !” “Oh,” I said, “I see! see! see. see.! period mended to an exclamation point To To To “To leave my my my my ‘my’ underscored things unprotected is a small matter; matter; thing; thing; matter; but when it imperils yours it’s quite another matter. I’m ashamed ashamed ashamed astonished ashamed of you, George.” “Well, now I come to look at it, I dunno but I feel mostly the same way.” way.” way.” way.”, sir.” period mended to a comma “How did you come to have all that money in the house?—you that let on to be so careful about always banking the results of the results of the results of the results of your pious robberies. Have you been been bette been been betting on the revival-catch again? Is there another religious epidemic in your African church?” I could see that that wounded him—poor old George. I knew it would, for it was probably true. It had been charged against him by the brother whom he supplanted as deacon of the church, and it was a sore spot with George, who always said it was a slander; but as he never went quite far enough to say it was a lie, and as he was something of a purist in language, this subtle discrimination was noticed by the family, to his damage. Out of love, they did not twit him with it; but out of love, I did—and rubbed it in, in, in, in, sometimes. “Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens Jackson Jackson Clemens you oughtn’t to talk so—because I never done it. I do bet on horse-races, and elections, and sprints, and base ball, and foot-ball foot-ball foot ball , and everything that ain’t sinful and got money in it, but I never done that.” “You didn’t, didn’t you? Well, let it go, for this time—though I I I I suppose you did. Where did you get this this this thoise fifteen hundred?” “At the Rochester Rochester Rochester Nashville Nashville Nashville Rochester races, day before yistiddy.” “George! do you mean to say that you have been five hundred miles from home and left nobody but women in the house all that time?” But But But “But George was not much troubled. He said— “I only went for three or four or four or four revised in pencil or four days, and it ain’t likely that anybody would break into the house in that little time. Especially where there’s an alarm. And And And And And Patrick Patrick Patrick Dennis Dennis Patrick was right there in his his his the his house, anyway, and nothing to do but ring him up.” I had now artfully artfully artfully artfully worked George up to the right place to spring my surprise upon him, and I touched it off: “George, you haven’t telegraphed anything to me lately; through your happy relations with the press, the papers have been muzzled. And so you think you have managed to hide something away which you didn’t want me to find out. But your hand was not well played. George, I know everything. This house has been burglarized! And on top of this, you all go off larking and leave it to be burglarized again. Now what do you think of yourself!” It didn’t phaze him. It didn’t start a hair. It left him as serene as a summer morning. He was the the the a most provoking creature about making a person’s calculations all go for nothing. A pleasant smile allowed a wink of his white teeth to show for a moment, and he said, comfortably— “There hain’t been no burglars here, Mr. Clemens. Clemens. Clemens. Jackson. Jackson Clemens. Nary a burglar.” “Now you know better. Mr. C— Mr. C— Mr. —— Mr. ———Charles Hopkins Clark C— told me, as I came up from the station.” “Yes, sir. Well, he done right. I I I I ‘I’ underscored put that up on him. him. him.” him. I done it for a purpose.” “You did, did you? Well, what was your purpose?” “I’m going to tell you all about it, Mr. Clemens. Mr. Clemens. sir. Mr. Clemens. Mr. Jackson. Mr. Jackson Mr. Clemens. You see, there was something happened here here here here in the house, and it was a mystery. Yes, sir, that is what it was; it was a mystery. Yes, sir, that is what it was; it was a mystery. Yes, sir, that is what it was; it was a mystery. Yes, sir, that is what it was; it was a mystery. I reckoned it would get out, and get in the papers, and then the family would be worried, and you would come flying here, four hundred miles, and no use in it. Fact is, I knowed the other servants couldn’t keep it, and I knowed they would ruther ruther ruther rauther have something big to tell than something little, so I come flat out and told them to say it was a burglar. That pleased them, of course, and they done it. Then the rest of it was easy for me. I went down to the papers and told them a noble good lie—because that ain’t no sin when you are trying to do good by it—and asked them to keep still and not scare the burglars out of town, for I was right on their track; and so they done it. Now it. Now it. [¶] “Now it. “Now marked to run on with no paragraph then, the thing that did happen was like this. Last Sunday we all went up to Northampton Northampton North Northampton Hopkinsville Hopkinsville Hopkinsville Northampton on a little excursion—” “Well, by gracious! The whole tribe, tribe, tribe, tribe, of course.” “No, sir, not all, all, all, all, that time. Three or four of Patrick’s Patrick’s Patrick’s Dennis’s Dennis’s Patrick’s children warn’t very very very very well, but most of the others went, and Bridget and Bridget and Mary and Bridget and revised in pencil Bridget and Patrick. Patrick. Patrick. Dennis. Dennis (TS 1898) Patrick. And the rest of us went, except Wapping Alice. She allowed she’d she’d she’d she’sd stay at home and take care of the house, and she done it.” “She shall have a monument.” “Yes, sir. Well, we missed the connection at Springfield, Springfield, Springfield, Wildcat, Wildcat Wildcat, Springfield, so we come come come caome back home. We got here about three in the afternoon, and there warn’t nobody in sight anywhere in these regions—just the way it always is out here Sunday afternoons in the summertime summertime summer time —lonesome; lonesome; lonely;some; lonesome; perfectly gashly. It was awful hot. So we come in by the ground-floor bedroom window, ground-floor bedroom window, front door, first- ground-floor bedroom window, ‘first-’ deleted, and ‘ground-’ inserted, in pencil ground-floor bedroom window, ground-floor bedroom window, off the ombra because it was handier than the annex, and come in here where it was cool. cool. cool., and happened to leave the door into the hall open behind us. cool. We set down here and begun begun begun begaun to chat along. Now I had put the front door on the alarm that morning, and didn’t say anything about it. I most always done so when we went on excursions—sometimes, anyway, if I thought of it. I most . . . of it. I most . . . of it. I most . . . of it. So we was setting setting setting sietting here chatting, and the doors into the dining room dining room dining room diningroom was spread apart a piece—about a foot. I was setting setting setting sietting just where you are now, and could see through through not in through that crack. All of a sudden I see a man go past it! it! it. it.! period mended to an exclamation point It give me such a start I couldn’t get my breath for as much as ten seconds; then I sung out ‘By jimminy, ‘By jimminy, “‘By Jackson, jimminy, ‘By jimminy, there’s a man!’ and we jumped for the hall door. Just then, Just then, Just then, Just then, just then, zzzzzip! went the alarm, then the front door banged to, and it stopped. I was there in a second, and out; and see a young man sailing over the sward like a deer. Now whatever whatever whatever what ever went with him I couldn’t make out; couldn’t make out; don’t know to this day; couldn’t make out; couldn’t make out; but when I got to the upper gate to the upper gate to Mrs. Stowe’s to the upper gate to the upper gate he warn’t anywhere in sight. “So then we come back, and looked the house over, over, over, over, and nothing was gone. That is, is, is, is, I told them to search the house and I would search the annex. We set here and talked it over, and over, and over, and over. Couldn’t seem to get enough enough s◇◇ enough enough of it. I told them everything was all right all right all right allalright , in the annex, and Wapping Alice sleeping like a graveyard; nothing hadn’t disturbed her. So then we agreed on burglary, and they said they would go out and take a walk. I judged they would. And I judged it would be a long one, if they met up with a good many friends that was interested in burglaries. “I had a chance to set down and think, now. I turned this and that and and and and t’other t’other ’tother thing over in my head head mind head head for about an hour, and pieced them together, and pieced them together, and pieced them together, and pieced them together, and when I was done I had made up my mind. What do you you not in you revised in pencil reckon it was, Mr. Clemens?” Clemens?” Clemens?” Jackson?” Jackson?” Clemens?” “I don’t know. What was it, it, it, it, George?” “Well, sir, this was it. I says to myself, I don’t want to wrong nobody, and anybody that knows me knows it ain’t my disposition; but it’s my opinion that Wapping Alice Alice Mary Alice Alice ain’t what she ought to be.” “Oh, nonsense!” “I hope it is, Mr. Clemens; Clemens; Clemens; Jackson; Jackson; Clemens; there wouldn’t be anybody gladder than me; for I am like the rest—I like Wapping Alice, and wouldn’t hurt a hair of her head for the world. And she’s far from her home and her people, too, poor thing, and I ain’t no dog, and can feel for that.” thing, and I ain’t no dog, and can feel for that.” thing, and I know what that is.thing, and I ain’t no dog, and I can feel for that.” Anybody that’s been a slave, and left his folks and come away up North here, does.” thing, and I ain’t no dog, and can feel for that.” insertion reinscribed for clarity thing, and I ain’t no dog, and can feel for that.” “What things did you piece together, George, to build up that wild idea?” “Well, sir, Well, sir, Well, Well, sir, it’s curious. The first thing that come into my head didn’t seem to have any business there, and took me by surprise. Do you remember, sir, remember, sir, remember sir remember, sir, remember, sir, the time the alarm went off three mornings last February, long before daylight? That was it. You know it warn’t ever accounted for.” “I know, but how does that connect itself with this remote matter?” “Well, the third morning, Wapping Alice was in the breakfast room when we was all talking about it; and she asked me what a burglar alarm was, and I told her. Now, Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson, Clemens, the landry landry landry laundry laundry didn’t wake you up any more after that.” “Come, that was well thought out. Go on.” “The next thing that come into my head was this. Last January the January the May the January the January the plumbers ripped out some wood-work wood-work wood-work woodwork to get at a leaky leaky frozen leaky leaky pipe, and a young carpenter was here a couple of days putting it back. A young Swede he was, by the name of Bjurnsen Bjuggersen Bjorgensen. Turrible name, and oversized him considerable, so it seemed to me, but that was it—or in that neighborhood. A young Swede he was, by the name of Bjurnsen Bjuggersen Bjorgensen. Turrible name, and oversized him considerable, so it seemed to me, but that was it—or in that neighborhood. A young Swede he was, by the name of Budjurnsen Budjacksen Budjuggersen Budjorgensen. Turrible name, and oversized him considerable, so it seemed to me, but that was it. inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over; second sentence inserted within the inserted passage A young Swede he was, by the name of Budjurnsen Budjuggersen Budjorgensen. Turrible name, and oversized him considerable, so it seemed to me, but that was it. A young Swede he was, by the name of Budjurnsen Budjuggersen Budjorgensen. Turible name, and oversized him considerable, so it seemed to me, but that was it.—or in that neighborhood. He set around in the kitchen a good deal, chatting, because he was working by the day and that always makes a person tireder tireder tireder tireder than the other kind, and so we all got to know him pretty well, and liked him. About the 1st 1st first June I went into Wapping Alice’s room one morning, and there was a suit of men’s clothes laying there, and she was half-soling the seat seat seat seats of the pants. I asked her about it and she said she was mending them up for the young carpenter—he asked her to do it. So that come into my head, now, I didn’t know why. “Thinking it over, I remembered another thing. When I was telling her about the burglar alarm that morning, I smelt her breath, and there was liquor on it. That was curious, because there ain’t any but locked-up locked-up locked-up locked-up liquor in this house, and I keep the key. She got that liquor outside. I never thought any more any more any more anything about it then; but but but bu but this time when it come up in my mind, I reckoned maybe she turned out at five five 5 in the morning, being dry, which is natural to the English, and tramped down to the Union Union Union Union bar and moistened up. Well, it would have made a fine stir if she had done it in women’s clothes. So So So So I judged maybe she disguised herself as a man and done it. How does that seem to strike you?” you?” you?” you?”, sir?” “Pretty thin, George. Still, it will do for a link if you can’t find anything better.” “But I reckon I can. I I The I I told the girls I found Wapping Alice sleeping like a graveyard. It warn’t strictly true, Mr. Clemens. Clemens. Clemens. Jackson. Jackson. Clemens. She warn’t in her room; she warn’t in the house at all.” “Is that so?” “She warn’t in the house at all. Now, then, when I had thought out my think, I says to myself, it stands like this: Wapping Alice knowed knowed knows knowed we was to be off on the excursion two days—” “Two days! Well, I’ll be—” “Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson, Clemens, you oughtn’t to swear.” “I didn’t swear, and I wasn’t even thinking of it. But a person could be forgiven for it if he did, considering the way things go on in this house the minute we turn turn turn turns our backs. Go on!” “Well, “Well, “Well, “Well, as I was saying, sir, sir, sir, sir, I says to myself it stands like this: Wapping Alice couldn’t know we were back and down there chatting in the library, and so, being dry, she reckoned she was perfectly safe to slip on her breeches and things and go out and oil up. If it was her, she heard me shout, and knowed she was out of luck this time. And if it was her, she would know we wouldn’t be in the house long, but would go out excursioning around somewhere and passing the time, then she could slide back and get into her own clothes again. So I just set still and waited. Well, sir, sure enough, just as it was getting most dark, here I just set still and waited. Well, sir, sure enough, just as it was getting most dark, here then I went and laid down on the floor in the bay window and begun to watch. [¶] “It turned out all right, Mr. Clemens. By and by I see a young fellow strolling along careless in a kind of a Sunday gait from the direction of the bridge, and he was sort of glancing up at the house as if he was admiring it and maybe going to buy it. And pretty soon he turned in at the lower gate and loafed along up towards the landry. He had on a false moustache, and didn’t look like our Alice, but it was her. In another minute she was inside, and in another ten I just set still and waited. Well, sir, sure enough, just as it was getting most dark, here I just set still and waited. Waell, sir, sure enough, just as it was getting ’most dark, here I just set still and waited. Well, sir, sure enough, just as it was getting dark, here she comes stretching and yawning into the library in her own clothes, and let on to be astonished to see me back from Northampton, Northampton, Northampton, Hopkinsville, Hopkinsville Hopkinsville, Northampton, and said she had most slept her head off, and I said, pretty sharp, ‘Blame ‘Blame ‘Blame ‘Blame your cats cats cats coats you ought to slept it clear off; it ain’t any good to you in a time of trouble; there’s been a man in the house, and if we had all been as sleepy-headed as you he would have got away with the whole place.’ place.’ place.’ place.’ She pretended to be ever so sorry she was asleep, but I reckoned I reckoned you could see that I reckoned I reckon I reckoned she got considerable comfort out of the notion that she hadn’t been found out. Now, then, Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson, Clemens, that is the case the way it stands. You see, yourself, that it warn’t of any importance, and not worth disturbing the family about. And so I put it up on the papers for a burglary, and got them to keep still and give it a chance to blow off off off. off over off and pass away. I warn’t thinking about myself, I done it for the family’s sake, to save them from worry. Wasn’t I right?” “George, you are always right. Half the time I don’t believe it, but to keep peace in the family it is safest to let on to. It’s an idiotic family, and thinks you know more than the dictionary. You have figured this matter out pretty well, for an unprofessional, but it is pretty hard on Wapping Alice, George. To sum up, what do you think of her now?” “Well, Mr. Clemens, Mr. Clemens, Mr. Clemens Jackson, Mr. Jackson, Mr. Clemens, I still think what I said before: she ain’t what she ought to be.” “You don’t think there is anything really bad about her, do you?” “Yes, sir, I do. I think she drinks.” “Is that that that that ‘that’ underscored all?” George George George George, the rabid prohibitionist, was speechless for a moment, then he said, with deep solemnity— “All? Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson, Clemens ain’t that enough?” I had a reason for asking the next question. “George, are you sure—I mean are you perfectly sure—that you aren’t aren’t are not aren’t aren’t a little prejudiced against Alice?” It made George uncomfortable. I was expecting it would. He coughed an embarrassed cough cough cough, cough or two, loosened his collar with his fingers, and presently found speech. “You mean the joke she played on me, me, me, me, Mr. Clemens?” Clemens?” Clemens?” Jackson?” Jackson?” Clemens?” “Yes.” “Well, sir, I give you my word I done quit worrying ’bout it. It was scanlous—it was just scanlous—but she didn’t mean no harm. There ain’t no malice in her. She’s the best-hearted best-hearted best-hearted best-hearted best-hearted girl there is; and if a person is pore or in trouble there ain’t nothing she won’t do for them. They can have everything she’s got; and everything anybody else has got, too, if she can get aholt of it. But But But But typed underscore retraced —when it comes to joking—oh, my land! Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson, Clemens, she can’t help it; it’s born in her. She ain’t got no resisting power. If she see a chance to play a joke and couldn’t play it, I believe it would kill her. She keeps the kitchen in a sweat; we don’t ever know what’s acoming acoming acoming a coming ‘acoming’ marked to make two words next. Now then—” “George, you are wandering from the subject. You always do, when I bring up that joke. I never can manage to pump your version of it out of you. You always go palavering off on side issues. Why is that?” “Now Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson, Clemens, I don’t like to talk about that joke. It was just scanlous. Why, it went all over this county county county country ; yes, sir, and and and not in clean out to Gilroy. Gilroy. Simsbury. Gilroy. Gilroy. Gilroy Everybody knows me in this town, little and big; and I hardly das’t to hardly das’t to dasn’t ◇ hardly das’t to hardly das’t to show up anywheres for four weeks, they kept at me so. Now Major Kinney, and Mr. Bunce, and Mr. Robinson, and Mr. Hubbard, and Gen’l—” Major Kinney, and Mr. Bunce, and Mr. Robinson, and Mr. Hubbard, and Gen’l—” Mr. Robinson, Mr. Bunce and Mr. Clark, and Mr.—Sam Dunham, and Mr.—” Major Archibald, and Mr. Dickson, and Mr. Rogers, and Mr. Hubbard, and Gen’l—” Major Archibald, and Mr. Dickson, and Mr. Rogers, and Mr. Hubbard, and Gen’l—” Major Archibald, Kinney, and Mr. Dickson, Bunce, and Mr. Rogers, Robinson, and Mr. Hubbard, and Gen’l—” “Well, never mind, George, let it go. I see I am never going to bring you to book. I think you would dodge around that joke a year a year a year a year and never step over the outside edge of it. Tell me—have you ever examined that laundry door?” George cheered up and looked relieved. “No, sir, not as I remember. What would I do it for?” “Well, your tale makes me think it will bear it. I wonder at you, George. Such a good detective and not think of that.” We went down and examined; and sure enough the ends of the ends of the ends of the ends of the metal pegs which made the electric connection had been filed off till they no longer touched the plate when the door was swung open. “George, you explained the function of these pegs to Wapping Alice?” “Yes, sir; and of course she went and filed them off, and that door hain’t been on the alarm since the first week of last February. I ain’t got no more to say; I’m just a fool.” “No, you mustn’t say that, because it includes me, and isn’t respectful. I ought to have examined the door last February.” II Up to this time this whole matter had seemed trifling to me, but it suddenly began to look cloudy, now. The laundry door had been tampered with for a purpose. George said— “Yes sir; and and and not in it was done so as Wapping Alice could put on men’s clothes and slide out whenever she wanted to, and liquor up. I am more set, now, than ever, that that girl ain’t what she ought to be. Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson, Clemens, if I had my way, I’d make her take the pledge before she’s a day older; I’d do it as shore as I’m a I’m a I’m a I’m a am standing here.” here.” here.” here.” Privately, Privately, Privately, Privately, I went further than that. I believed that Alice was harboring sneak-thieves. I felt sure that an exhaustive search of the house would show that a thousand little things had been carried off. I resolved to hold a court in the morning, and fan out the evidence and get at the bottom facts facts facts of facts of this dark episode. dark episode. mystery. dark episode. dark episode. I woke refreshed, and ready for business. Eager to begin, too; all alive with the novelty novelty novelty, novelty and interest and mystery of the situation, and sure I could manage it it as it it in as imposing style as any detective in the land, except George. When George brought up my breakfast we discussed and matured the plans; then he went down and sent up the witnesses, one at a time, and I questioned them separately. Last of all came Wapping Alice. She had on a white summer gown, with a pink ribbon at the throat, throat, throat, and another one around her waist, throat and another one around her waist., throat, and looked very neat and comely and attractive and attractive and attractive and attractive and modest; also troubled and downcast. I questioned her gently, on this, that and and and and then the other point, and found her cautious, evasive and reluctant. She kept slipping through my fingers all the time; I never could quite catch her, anywhere. I was forced to admire her penetration and her ingenuity. I was not able to arrange any any any my any trap which she would walk into. Still I was making progress, and she could see it. She did did was did did not know what the previous witnesses had said, and this was a hindrance to her. Every now and then, consequently, I was able to drop a surprise on her which disordered her story and made difficulties for her. She was determined she wouldn’t know that there had been a man in the house. No, it could be that there had been a man, and of course there had been, since the others others others others said so, but she had no personal knowledge of it. However, I gradually drove her into a corner; and at last when I thought the right time had come, I sprung my final surprise and showed all my cards. I wove the stories stories stories storyies of the servants into a clear and compact narrative, and reeled it off like a person who had been behind the door and seen it all. The astonishment astonishment (pretended), astonishment astonishment that rose in her face, and grew, and grew, as I went along—ah, well, it was an inspiration to me! It was as if I was plucking the secretest privacies out of her heart, one by one, and displaying them before her amazed eyes. her amazed eyes. her. amazed eyes. her amazed eyes. When I had finished she seemed seemed seemed revised in pencil seemed dazed, and said humbly— “I see it is no use, sir; you know all. I am a poor friendless friendless not in friendless girl. I do not know what to do,” and she stood there pitifully twining and untwining her fingers and gazing down at the carpet. And to tell the truth, it brought the moisture to my eyes. And to tell the truth, . . . my eyes. And to tell the truth, . . . my eyes. inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over And t To tell the truth, . . . my eyes. And to tell the truth, . . . my eyes. “Make a clean breast, Alice; it is the only wise and honest thing to do.” After a struggle she said she would do it, and she began. This is the substance of her story. story. story. story.: That young Swede, Bjurnsen Bjuggersen Bjuggersen Bjacksen Bjuggersen Bjuggersen Bjorgensen, Bjorgensen, Bjorgensen did some joiner-work in the house in January, and when it it it he it was finished finished d finished finished he was out of work and remained so. In the kitchen they all liked him and were sorry for him. liked him and were sorry for him. liked him and were sorry for him. liked him. Presently he had nowhere nowhere no place nowhere nowhere ‘no where’ marked to close up nowhere to sleep and nothing to eat. She took pity on him and secretly allowed him to sleep in our main cellar—in a part of it which had been walled off for a bowling alley and afterwards neglected and never used, and never visited. She made a pallet for him there. Also she carried food there for him. She warned him to enter, nights, enter, nights, enter, nights, enter nights, enter nights before Patrick went his final rounds— Patrick went his final rounds— Patrick closed the laundry door— Dennis went his final rounds— Dennis went his final rounds— Patrick went his final rounds— ten o’clock— o’clock— o’clock.— o’clock— and get out before he he Patrick he he came in the morning to replenish the furnace. There was a lock lock bolt on the door lock lock on the laundry laundry laundry laundry door, but it was never used; the burglar alarm was protection enough. She knew the lock was not used, but she knew nothing about the burglar alarm. She learned about it the third time time morning time time that it raised raised ◇ went raised raised me out of bed. George explained the thing to her; then Bjurnsen Bjorgensen filed off the ends of the metal pegs, and after that he came and went at any hour he pleased. pleased. pleased.” pleased.” “Ever since?” “Yes sir; he has slept in the cellar all these months. When there was excursions he would come daytimes. He was free of the whole house, then. But he never took anything, sir. He was perfectly honest. I mended his clothes for him, I made that pallet for him, I fed I made that pallet for him, I fed I made that pallet for him, I fed I fed I made that pallet for him, I fed him all these months. I hope you will forgive me, sir; I’m but a poor girl and I never meant any harm.” “Forgive you? Why, hang it, you poor good-hearted thing, you poor good-hearted thing, you poor good-hearted thing, you poor good-hearted thing, you haven’t done anything to forgive. I was afraid he was a thief, that’s all. And so there’s been all this pow-wow about just nothing. I thought there was going to be something dramatic, something theatrical, and now it’s all spoilt theatrical, and now it’s all spoilt theatrical, and now its all spoilt theatrical, and now it’s all spoiled theatrical, and now it’s all spoilt ; it’s enough to make a man swear swear want swear swear . You ought to be taken out and drowned for it. But never mind, let it go; there’s nothing but disappointments in this world, anyhow anyhow anyhow anyhow ‘any how’ marked to close up . Go Go There’s one thi Go Go along about your work, and leave me to my sorrows. But there’s one thing—that young fellow ought to be very very very very grateful to you; you’ve been a good friend to him, Alice.” She She She “She suddenly broke down and suddenly broke down and suddenly broke down and suddenly broke down and burst out sobbing as if her heart would break. break. break. And brok heavily canceled, doubtful; ‘and’ written and deleted underneath break. “Grateful? Him Him Him Him typed underscore retraced ? Oh, sir, he—he—” Through the breaks in her sobs words escaped which conveyed a paralysing revelation. “What!” he—he—” Through the breaks in her sobs words escaped which conveyed a paralysing revelation. [¶] “What!” he—has ruined me ◇◇◇◇◇ [¶] “What!” he—” Through ‘has ruined me’ very heavily canceled and doubtful; rest of insertion written on the verso with instructions to turn over presently, through the breaks in her sobs words escaped which conveyed a paralyzing revelation. [¶] “What!” he—he—” Through the breaks in her sobs words escaped which conveyed a paralyzing revelation. [¶] “What!” “Oh, dear-dear, it is too true, sir—and dear-dear, it is too true, sir—and dear-dear—ruined me, and , it is too true, sir—and dear, dear, it is too true, sir—and dear-dear, it is too true, sir—and now he won’t marry me! And I a poor friendless girl in a strange land.” “Won’t marry you! Oh, he won’t, won’t he? We’ll see about that!” The rage I was in—well, a rage like that exhausts a person more in half an hour than a forty-mile walk. I sent the girl away and got back to bed. I told her to keep away and got back to bed. I told her to keep away and went to bed. I told her to keep away and went to bed. I told her to keep , with instructions to keep away and went got back to bed. I told her to keep her secret to herself and tell George I wanted to see him. When he came I spread the ghastly facts before him, and they nearly straightened his wool with horror and indignation. And he was astonished and grieved at young Bjorgensen’s conduct. He said he was as nice and good-hearted and manly a young fellow as he ever saw, and he couldn’t ever have dreamed such things of him. First, we telephoned for Reverend Thomas X.; next, First, we telephoned for Reverend Thomas X.; next, Then First, we telephoned for Rev. Thomas X.; next, ‘Thomas X.;’ revised in pencil to ‘Joseph X.;’ and then restored in ink First we telephoned for Rev. Thomas X.; next First we telephoned for Rev. Thomas X.; next, we laid plans for the marriage of that couple. I said I would teach that scamp scamp scamp young scamp a lesson that he wouldn’t forget till he was a widower. By the time the plans were completed, Mr. X. was with us. The Reverend Joe Twichell The Reverend Joe Twichell The Reverend Joe The Reverend Joe The Reverend Joe Twichell was off on his vacation, and Tom was supplying his pulpit. Next to Joe, he was the choicest man in the world for this kind of a circus. He was lovely, all through, like Joe, and he had Joe’s luxuriant passion for adventure and doing good. He was fatter than Joe; a good deal fatter, and the hot weather made a kind of perennial water-works of him; but no matter, his good heart was touched by the tale we we he we we told him, and he he we he he was ready to shed his last drop of perspiration in the cause, for he knew our Alice well, and liked her, and was outraged by her pitiful fate. He took the names and ages of the couple, and went went Bjorgensen’s address, and went went off down to the town clerk’s to get the license license licence . He was to arrive at our house at seven seven 7 seven sharp, in the evening, and shut himself up in the bath-room bath-room bathroom bath-room attached to what we called the schoolroom, and sweat there till he was wanted schoolroom, and sweat there till he was wanted school-room, and sweat there till he was wanted school room, and sweat there till he was wanted schoolroom, and sweat there till he was wanted ; it was on the second floor, over the library. Wapping Alice was to send a note by hand to her unintentional unintentional unintentional unintentionalding intended, and invite him to come out at at and at at eight eight 8 eight o’clock sharp, and spend the evening. George was to telephone the chief of police and and to and and ask him to furnish me an officer in plain clothes, and have him at the house at sharp seven thirty seven thirty 7.30 , where George would be on the lookout for him and shut him up in the library. He was to stay there until I should ring a bell—one stroke. He was . . . one stroke. He was . . . one stroke. He was . . . one stroke. I was to be alone in the schoolroom at eight eight 8 ; Wapping Wapping and young Bjorg Wapping Wapping Alice was to receive Bjuggersen Bjuggersen Bjacksen Bjuggersen not in Bjuggersen Bjorgensen at the front door, betray him into the schoolroom, where I was, where I was, not in where I was, and then then then then glide into the nursery, adjoining, into the nursery, adjoining, away into the nursery, adjoining, into the nursery, adjoining, and leave him to me. At six six 6 in the evening the servants were to be let into the secret. They were then to dress in gala; then shut themselves up in the kitchen and stay there until I rang three bells—the signal that the wedding was ready to begin, and witnesses wanted. On the dining room dining room dining-room table there was to be moisture for the crowd, to finish up the wedding with, crowd, to finish up the wedding with, crowd; , to finish up the wedding with, crowd to finish up the wedding with, and no charge for corkage. My native appetite for doing things in a theatrical way feasted itself with a relish on this spectacular program. George admired the arrangement, too, and was proud of his share in contriving it. He said it was one of the showiest things he had ever helped to put together. Then we fidgeted around and waited. It was a feverish long afternoon for us, but it dragged itself through, and the twilight began to gather and deepen at last. No hitch occurred anywhere. Each Each Each actor arrived on the stroke of his hour. Each Each Each actor was in his place at his appointed time. At seven seven 7 the Reverend Tom arrived, and and and and was shown up stairs and shut into the bath-room bath-room bathroom bath-room ; at seven thirty seven thirty 7.30 the policeman arrived and was shut up in the library; at seven forty-five seven forty-five 7.45 I was in the schoolroom; at eight eight 8 the bridegroom was with me, and the bride had taken post in the nursery. The curtain was up, the performance ready to begin. up, the performance ready to begin. up., the performance ready to begin. up, the performance ready to begin. Bjorgensen was startled when he saw me, and began to apologize, supposing there had been a mistake; but I said it was all right, I was expecting him. He did not want to sit down, and said he should feel more comfortable standing; but I insisted persuasively, and presently he yielded and took a chair—the edge of it. He seemed a good deal perplexed, and a trifle uneasy. He was a handsome young fellow, with a good face and a a a a clear eye, and I noticed with some concern that he was able to throw me out of the window in case he should want to. His Alice had fed him well. His Alice had fed him well. His Alice had fed him well. His Alice had fed him well. I opened up the conversation with ordinary topics, for it was my purpose to thaw him out and get him into a comfortable and persuadable frame of mind before I should enter upon the main business. I meant to keep at him until I made him laugh, if it took all night. It was hard work, and long; but it won. At the end of half an hour he let go a hearty and unconstrained laugh, and I recognized that things were in shape now to call game. So then I drifted along gradually into a revealment of the fact that I knew he had been sleeping in our cellar for months; that he had been seen to pass through the house; and that he had destroyed the electric connection which guarded the laundry and indeed the whole establishment. I told the story sorrowfully, and in a reproachful voice, and the cheerfulness gradually faded out of his face, and his head drooped drooped drooped. drooped in shame. There was a painful silence now, for some moments, for I paused paused waited paused paused to let the effects work up; then I said— “Alice was your benefactor—your benefactor, do you understand? She saved you, she nourished you, she protected you when you were friendless. And for for for your for reward—you take away her purity!” He jumped as if he had been shot, and his face was transfigured with fury. “I? Who says I did!” “She says so.” “She lies! To the bottom of her soul she lies!” Confound him, he almost convinced me. He went raging up and down the room, denying, protesting, almost crying; and really it was pitiful to see. But I had my duty to perform for that poor girl, and I hardened my heart and held to my purpose. Now and then I said a soothing word, and urged him to tranquillize tranquillize re tranquilize tranquilize himself and sit down and let us have a quiet, reasonable talk over the matter and see if we could not arrive at an adjustment that would be fair and satisfactory to both parties. And I said— “You see, there is really only one right and honorable thing for you to do—only one—you must marry her.” It warmed his fury up to boiling-point again. “Marry her! I’d see her hanged a hundred times, first, and then I wouldn’t. Marry her! Why in the nation should I marry her?” “Why, what objection have you?” “Objection! Oh, great guns! Why I don’t care anything for her beyond warm friendship—there’s no love. Why in the world should I marry her?—I don’t want a wife.” I said, coaxingly— I said, coaxingly— I said, coaxingly— not in “Ah, but consider the hard circumstances. Here she is, is, is, is, a poor girl far from home, and her good name gone; surely you will have pity on her. Think— Think— Think—your honor— heavily canceled, doubtful Think— to you is granted a gracious and noble privilege: you can make an honest woman of her.” “But I don’t want the privilege; and I won’t have it! If her character needs coopering up, I I I I ‘I’ underscored can’t help that. It isn’t any affair of mine. Why am I I I I ‘I’ underscored selected out for the job. Privilege, you call it! It just makes me want to rip and curse—that’s what it does.” I soothed him further. At least I meant it for that. “Mind, Bjorgensen, I am not blaming you for denying it—far from it. Anybody would—first off; I would myself. For when we are excited we say things things things we s things which we are not really responsible for. I am not blaming you. You are excited, now; but when you get cool, and are your own honest, honorable self again—” He threw up his hands in a sort of agony of despair, and said— “Ah, how did I ever get into this awful mess! Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson Clemens, don’t don’t don’t don’t ‘don’t’ underscored you believe me?—can’t you believe me?” Hang it, I was touched; but I had a duty to perform, and I put my weakness aside and kept my grip. By gentle persuasions I at last got the young fellow to come and sit down again; and with a proper delicacy I turned turned pa turned turned my head away, for the tears were running down his face. I said— “Well “Well “Well “Well , you know, Bjorgensen, that I haven’t merely Alice’s testimony. It is formidably formidably formally formidably formidably backed up—more than that—convincingly backed up—made unshakable—” “How?” “By circumstantial evidence. You spent a hundred and fifty nights in our cellar; your presence was known to only one person; that person secretly fed and bedded you there; that person was a simple, confiding, unprotected girl. Answer me, now, out of your own common sense: with these facts back of Alice’s testimony, what would a jury say?” It wrung a groan from him. “Lord help me!” he said. “I never thought of that; never thought how it would look.” that; never thought how it would look.” that.; never thought how it would look.” period mended to a semicolon that; never thought how it would look.” He sat silent a while—hunting for a straw to catch at. Then he said, in an aggressive tone, “But it wouldn’t be proof, say what you may; may; may; they could may; a court would have to admit that I could have been there for—for—” “Burglary “Burglary “Burglary “For b“Burglary , for instance?” It made him jump. “Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson Clemens, I make solemn oath that I never took even so much as a straw; I swear that I—” “Yes “Yes “Yes “Yes —but that is not to to to to the purpose. And it is not important. Quite aside from that, you were guilty,—by —by —by —by your own admission five minutes ago— admission five minutes ago— confession, admission five minutes ago— admission five minutes ago— of a crime which can send you to State prison for ten years.” “Who? I?” “You.” “What was it?” “House-breaking. You entered by unlawful means. You destroyed the safeguard safeguard safe-guard marked to close up safeguard of the laundry door.” He was quaking all over, now, and his breath was was was was coming and going in gasps. “Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson, Clemens, is that a penitentiary offence? Oh, take it back, take it back! Don’t say it!” “But I must. It is only the truth.” He dropped his elbows on the table, and his head in his hands, and moaned and grieved. Presently, all of a sudden he looked up and set his eyes on mine with such a fierce light in them that it gave me a start. “This “This textual note: In the top margin of the MS2 page beginning with this word SLC wrote and canceled ‘Policeman, one bell.’ is a game!” he shouted, and brought his fist down on the table with a crash. “It’s a game that you’ve put up on me; that’s what it is—a game to force force make force force me to marry that lying baggage. I see it all. Now deny it if you can!” “I am not denying it. It is a game; and I am playing this end of it.” “You mean you have played it. And you’ve lost, too. I’ll never marry that girl—no, not if I live a thousand years! Now, then, what are you going to do about it!” then, what are you going to do about it!” then.”, what are you going to do about it!” then, what are you going to do about it!” then, what are you going to do about it!” “You will be a married man inside of an hour. Or—” hour. Or—” hour. Or—” hour., or—” “Or what?” he scoffed. “Go to jail. Take your choice.” jail. Take your choice.” jail.” Take your choice.” Take your choice.” jail. Take your choice.” That warmed up his scorn. He rose, took his hat, and made a fine and rather elaborate bow, and said— “I wish you a very good evening, sir. sir. Mr. Clemens. sir. sir. When you start out another time to play a game, you want to look at your cards, first, and see how much they are worth. And next time you start in to scare a man, you want to select better. Pleasant evening, to you, dear sir. dear sir. ◇◇ dear sir. dear sir. Good-bye.” “Good-bye. Pleasant evening. Allow me—I will touch the bell. You will find a policeman down stairs who will help you out.” I put my finger on the button, and waited. The color went out of the young fellow’s face, and he said, with a rather dubious attempt at bluster— “That don’t scare, either.” “All right. Shall I ring?” He hesitated, then his confidence forsook him, and he said— “No. Wait.” He came and sat down. He mused a moment or two, then said, “Mr. said, “Mr. said, “Mr. said,”— ¶ “Mr. Clemens, Clemens, Clemens, Jackson, Jackson Clemens, I put it to it to not in it to you on your honor: is there an officer down there?” “There is. Your time is short. Your time is short. Your time is short. Your time is short. Look at the clock. It is five minutes to ten. You may have the lacking five to make up your mind in. At ten you marry, or go to jail.” jail.” jail.” jail.” typed quotation marks retraced It was time to walk the floor again. Any person in his circumstances would know that. He got up and did it. Sometimes moaning, sometimes swearing; always trying to find some way out of his bitter toils, and not succeeding. At last I put my finger on the button, and began to count, solemnly— “One—two—three—” two—three—” two—”three—” revised in pencil two—three—” “Damn her eyes, I’ll marry her! Oh, it’s awful—awful. But I’ve I’ve I’ve I’ve got to do it, and I will. I’ll marry her next winter, I give you my word.” “Why not now?” “Now Now Now Now typed underscore retraced ? I reckon you you you f you are forgetting one or two details?” “Which ones?” “License—preacher— preacher— preacher—and so on.” preacher— witnesses—and so on so on so-on so on .” “Oh, you think so! Tom! Alice!” They entered. I touched the bell bell bell bells —three times, then once—to fetch the others. The The By The The whole gang burst in on the instant, policeman and all instant, policeman and all instant, policeman and all instant; policeman and all instant, policeman and all ; they had been listening at the keyhole. keyhole. door. door. keyhole. Alice was was was were was dressed to kill; so were her mates. The Reverend Tom was melted away to half his size, and had hardly strength enough to get about. It must have been a frightful two two two two three hours hours hours for hours in that little blistering bath-room bath-room bathroom bath-room for a fat man like that. In my time I have seen millions of astonished carpenters, carpenters, joiners, carpenters, carpenters, but not all of them put together were were wre were were as astonished as our bridegroom. It knocked him groggy; and he was It knocked him groggy; and he was He was It knocked him groggy; and he was It knocked him groggy; and he was a married man before he knew what he was about. At At Upon the At At the preacher’s suggestion he kissed the bride—it didn’t seem to taste over-good to him— bride—it didn’t seem to taste over-good to him— bridge—perfunctorily——it didn’t seem to taste over-good to him— bride—it didn’t seem to taste over-good to him— and said to me, with a sigh— “It’s your game, sir. game, sir. game., sir. game, sir. What a hand you held!” Then they all cleared for the dining room below and the refreshments, and Tom and I sat down, I to smoke and he to fan; and we talked the whole grand thing over, and were were were were very, very happy and content. And he put his hand in blessing on my head, and said, with tears in his voice— “Mark, “Mark, “Mark, “Jackson, “Jackson, “Clemens, “Mark, dear boy, you will be forgiven many a sin for the noble noble good good noble deed you have done this night.” I was touched, myself. Just I was touched, myself. [¶] Just Well I was touched, myself. [¶] Just I was touched, myself. no ¶ Just then George staggered in, looking stunned stunned stunned stunned corrected miswriting stunned and weak, and said— “That Wapping Alice—blame her skin, she’s a man!” And so it turned out. She explained that it had never occurred to her to make that dire charge against poor Bjorgensen till I complained that the outcome of the original episode wasn’t theatrical enough. She thought she could mend that defect. Well, her effort wasn’t bad—you see it, yourself. Well, her effort wasn’t bad—you see it, yourself. I think she succeeded. Well, her effort wasn’t bad—you see it, yourself. Well, her effort wasn’t bad—you see it, yourself. I keep calling her she she “she” she —I can’t help it; I mean he. The couple never lived together, nor had any family. The couple never lived together, nor had any family. The couple never lived together. There are no children. , nor had any family. [¶] I have [¶] I have changed some of the scenes names in this infernal episode, but no essential fact. George is gone, poor fellow, but the other witnesses live yet. Mark Twain [paraph] [¶] A quartermaster came along, and said it had just gone six bells. It was time to forsake the moonlit sea and turn in; so we did it. Mark Twain [paraph] The couple never lived together. They have no family. [¶] A quartermaster came along, and said it had just gone six bells. It was time to forsake the moonlit sea and turn in; so we did it. Mark Twain. Mark Twain [paraph] Vienna, November, 1898. ‘quarter master’ marked to close up; signature written over typed name The couple never lived together, nor had any family.