The Machine Episode Clemens’s unsparing account of his own beguilement into financially supporting James W. Paige’s development of an automatic typesetter is so manifestly autobiographical that it is judged to be among the chapters Clemens drafted for the autobiography, although he did not explicitly identify it that way. The manuscript, now in the Mark Twain Papers, was written in two separately paginated stages. The first part (twenty manuscript pages) was written in December 1890, almost ten years after Clemens began investing in the typesetter and at a point when his total investment had reached or exceeded $170,000, despite Paige’s failure to produce a successful prototype. The second part (nine manuscript pages) starts with “End of 1885” and was written in late 1893 or early 1894, when Clemens had left his family in Europe and traveled to New York to participate in negotiations concerning the typesetter. He must have written it before 1 February 1894, when he reached a new agreement with Paige that he believed would make him wealthy (Notebook 33, TS pp. 47, 51, CU-MARK). Paine quoted from the manuscript in his biography (MTB, 2:903–5, 913), and in his edition of the autobiography he published most of the first part (with the usual silent omissions), but only four paragraphs of the second part (MTA, 1:70–78). Neider did not include any part of this text in his edition. Clemens continued to excoriate Paige in the Autobiographical Dictation of 2 June 1906. The Machine Episode Episode Episode. double rule [Written in the closing days of 1890.] [Written . . . 1890.] centered [Written . . . 1890.] double rule This episode has now spread itself over more than one-fifth one-fifth one-eleventh fifth revised in pencil, probably by Clemens but possibly by Paine of my life—a considerable stretch of time, as I am now fifty-five years old. Ten or eleven years ago, Dwight Buell, a jeweler, called at our house and was shown up to the billiard room—which was my study; and the game got more study than the other sciences. He wanted me to take some stock in a type-setting machine. He said it was at the Colt Arms factory, and was about finished. finished finished. I was indifferent, but I took $2,000 of the stock. I was always taking little chances like that; and almost almost almost always losing by it, too—a thing which I did not greatly greatly greatly mind, because I was always careful to risk only such amounts as I could easily afford to lose. Some time afterward I was invited to go down to the factory and see the machine. I went, promising myself nothing; for I knew all about type-setting by practical experience, and held the settled and solidified opinion that a successful type-setting machine was an impossibility, for the reason that a machine cannot be made to think, and the thing that sets movable movable movable type type types‘s’ inserted in pencil, presumably by Paine must think or retire defeated. So, the performance I witnessed did most thoroughly thoroughly thoroughtly corrected miswriting amaze me. Here was a machine that was really setting type; and doing it with swiftness and accuracy, too. Moreover, it was distributing its case at the same time. The distribution was automatic: automatic: automatic;: colon mended from a semicolon the machine fed itself from a galley of dead matter, and without human help or suggestion; for it began its work of its own accord when the type channels needed filling, and stopped of its own accord when they were full enough. The machine was almost a complete compositor; it lacked but one feature—it did not “justify” the lines; this was done by the operator’s assistant. I saw the operator set at the rate of 3,000 ems an hour, which, counting distribution, was but little short of four case-men’s work. William Hamersley was there. I had known him long, I thought I knew him well. I had great respect for him, and full confidence in him. He said he was already a considerable owner, and was now going to take as much more of the stock as he could afford. Wherefore I set down my name for an additional $3,000. It is here that the music begins. Footnote. Hamersley now says we never had any such agreement. He will revise that remark presently. Footnote . . . presently. Footnote . . . presently. inserted in pencil by SLC, and deleted in pencil, presumably by Paine Before very long Hamersley called on me and asked me what I would charge to raise a capital of $500,000 $500,000 $5000,000 for the manufacture of the machines. I said I would undertake it for $100,000. He said, raise $600,000, then, and take $100,000. I agreed. I sent for my partner, Webster; he came up from New York and went back with the project. There was some correspondence. Hamersley wrote Webster a letter which will be inserted later on. I will remark, here, that James W. Paige, James W. Paige, James W. Paige, the little bright-eyed, alert, smartly smartly shar smartly dressed inventor of the machine, is a a the a most extraordinary compound of business thrift and commercial insanity; of cold calculation and jejune sentimentality; of veracity and falsehood; of fidelity fidelity fidely fidelity corrected miswriting and treachery; of nobility nobility nohbility and baseness; of pluck and cowardice; of wasteful liberality and pitiful stinginess; of solid sense and weltering moonshine; of towering genius and trivial ambitions; of merciful bowels and a petrified heart; of colossal vanity and— But there the opposites stop. His vanity stands alone, sky-piercing, as sharp of outline as an Egyptian monolith. It is the only unpleasant unpleasant unpleasant feature in him that is not modified, softened, compensated by some converse characteristic. There is another point or two worth mentioning: he . . . nobody. He . . . nobody. he can persuade anybody; he can convince nobody There . . . mentioning: There . . . mentioning: . There . . . nobody There . . . nobody. He has a crystal-clear mind, as regards the grasping and concreting of an idea which has been lost and smothered under a chaos of baffling legal language; and yet it can always be depended upon to take the simplest half dozen facts and draw from them a conclusion that will astonish the idiots in the asylum. It is because he is a dreamer, a visionary. His imagination runs utterly away with him. He is a poet; a most great and genuine poet, whose sublime sublime divine sublime creations are written in steel. He is the Shakespeare of mechanical invention. In all the ages he has no peer. Indeed, there is none that even approaches him. Whoever is qualified to fully comprehend his marvelous machine will grant that its its it is easily the greatest invention of all time. its place is upon the loftiest summit of human invention, with no kindred between it and the far foothills below. But I must explain these strange contradictions above listed, or the man will be misunderstood and wronged. His business thrift is remarkable, and it is also of a peculiar cut. He has worked at his expensive machine for more than twenty years, but always at somebody else’s cost. He spent hundreds and thousands of other folk’s money, yet always kept his machine and its possible patents in his own possession, possession, hands, possession, unencumbered by an embarrassing an embarrassing a an embarrassing lien of any kind—except once, which will be referred to by and by. He could never be beguiled into putting a penny of his own into his work. Once he had a brilliant idea in the way of a wonderfully valuable application of electricity. To test it, he said, it, he said, it, he said, would cost but $25. I was paying him a salary of nearly $600 a month and was was s was spending $1,200 $1,200 $1200 on the machine besides; yet he asked me to risk the $25 and take half of the result. I declined, and he dropped the matter. Another time he was sure he was on the track of a splendid thing in electricity. It would cost only a trifle—possibly $200— —possibly $200— —possibly $200— to try some experiments; I was asked to furnish the money and take half of the result. I furnished money until the sum had grown to about $1,000 $1,000 a thousand dollars , and everything was pronounced ready for the grand exposition. The electric current was turned on—the thing declined to go. Two years later the same thing was successfully worked out and patented by a man in the State of New York and was at once sold for a huge sum of money and a royalty-reserve besides. The drawings in the electrical journal showing the stages by which that inventor had approached the consummation of his idea, proving his way step by step as he went, were almost the twins of Paige’s drawings of two years before. It was almost as if the same hand had drawn both sets. It . . . sets. It . . . sets. Paige said we had had it, and we should have known it if we had only tried an alternating current after failing with the direct current; said he had felt sure, sure, almost absolutely sure, sure, at the time, that at cost of at cost of for at cost of $100 $100 a hundred dollars he could apply the alternating test and come out triumphant. Then he added, in tones absolutely sodden with self-sacrifice self-sacrifice nobleness and self-sacrifice , and just barely touched with reproach, and . . . reproach, and just barely touched with reproach, “But ¶ “But ¶ “But you had already spent so much money on the thing money on the thing money on the thing that I hadn’t the heart to ask you to spend any more.” If I had asked him why he didn’t draw on his own pocket, he would not have understood me. He could not have grasped so strange an idea as that. He would have thought there was something the matter with my mind. I am speaking honestly; he could not have understood it. A cancer of A cancer of A cancer of old habit and long experience could as easily understand the suggestion that it board itself a while. old . . . while. old . . . while. inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over In drawing contracts he is always able to take care of himself; and in every instance he will work into the contracts injuries to the other party and advantages to himself which were never considered or mentioned in the preceding verbal agreement. In one contract he got me to assign to him several hundred thousand dollars’ worth of property for a certain valuable consideration—said valuable consideration being the re-giving to me of another piece of property which was not his to give but already belonged to me! re-giving . . . me! re-giving . . . me! ‘re-giving . . . me!’ underscored in pencil See assignment, Aug. 12, 1890. See assignment, Aug. 12, 1890. See assignment, Aug. 12, 1890. written in the margin with no indication of where to insert in the text; deleted in pencil, presumably by Paine I quite understand that I am confessing myself a fool; but that is no matter, the reader would find it out anyway, as I go along. Hamersley was our joint lawyer, and I and I and a and I deletion doubtful had every confidence in his wisdom and cleanliness. Once when I was was ha was lending money to Paige during a few months, I presently presently found presently found that he was giving receipts to my representative instead of notes! But that man never lived who could catch catch persuade catch Paige so nearly asleep as to palm off on him a piece of paper which apparently satisfied a debt when it ought to acknowledge a loan. I must must musst corrected miswriting throw in a parenthesis here, or I shall do Hamersley an injustice. Here and there I have seemed to cast little reflections upon him. Pay no attention to them. I have no feeling about him, I have no harsh words to say about him. He is a great great great big fat good-natured, kind-hearted, chicken-livered slave; with no more pride than a tramp, no more sand than a rabbit, no more moral sense than a wax figure, and no more sex than a tape-worm. He sincerely thinks he is honest, he sincerely thinks he is honorable. It is my daily prayer to God that he be permitted to live and die in those superstitions. I gave him a twentieth of my American holding, at Paige’s request; I gave him a twentieth of my foreign holding at his own supplication; supplication; request; supplication; SLC wrote ‘supplication;’ as a possible alternate reading, without deleting ‘request;’; his second thought has been adopted I advanced advanced spent advanced near $40,000 $40,000 forty thousand dollars in five years to keep these interests sound and valid for him. In return, he drafted every contract which I made with Paige in all that time—clear up to to to followed by a canceled caret with no insertion September September Au September , 1890—and pronounced it good and fair; and then I signed. These unique contracts will be found in the Appendix. May they be instructive to the struggling student of law. These . . . law. These . . . law. deleted in pencil, presumably by Paine Yes, it is as I have said: Paige is an extraordinary compound of business thrift and commercial insanity. Instances of his commercial insanity are simply innumerable. Here are some examples. When I took hold of the machine Feb. 6, 1886, its faults had been corrected and a setter and a justifier could turn out about 3,500 ems an hour on it; possibly 4,000. There was no machine that could pretend rivalry to it. Business sanity would have said, put it on the market as it was, secure the field, secure the field, secure the field, and add improvements later. Paige’s business insanity said, add the improvements first, and risk losing the field. And that is what he set out to do. To add a justifying mechanism to that machine would take a few months and cost $9,000 by his estimate, or $12,000 by Pratt & Whitney’s. I agreed to add said justifier to that machine. There could be no sense in building a new machine. Yet in total violation of the agreement, Paige went immediately to work to build a new machine, although aware, by recent experience, that the cost could not fall below $150,000, and that the time consumed would be years instead of months. Well, when four years had been spent and the new machine was able to to to a to exhibit a marvelous capacity, we appointed the 12th 12th 12th of January for Senator Jones of Nevada to come and make an inspection. He was not promised a perfect machine, but a machine which could be perfected. He He He ‘W’ partly formed had agreed agreed promised agreed to invest one or two hundred thousand dollars in its fortunes; and had also said that if the exhibition was particularly favorable, he might take entire charge of the elephant. At the last moment Paige concluded to add an air-blast air-blast air-blast , (afterwards found to be unnecessary); wherefore, Jones Jones wh Jones had to be turned back from New York to wait a couple of months and lose his interest in the thing. A year ago, Paige made what he regarded as a vast and magnanimous concession: Hamersley and I might sell the English patent for $10,000,000 $10,000,000 ten million dollars ! A little later a man came along who thought he could bring some Englishmen who would buy that patent, and he was sent off to fetch them. He was gone so long that Paige’s confidence began to diminish, and with it his price. He finally got down to what he said was his very last and bottom price for that patent—$50,000 $50,000 fifty thousand dollars ! This was the only time in five years that I ever saw Paige in his right mind. I could furnish other other a good many other examples of Paige’s business insanity—enough of them to fill six or eight volumes, perhaps, but I am not writing his history, I am merely sketching his portrait. Greatest of all mistakes that things warn’t arranged so as to have four persons in the Trinity. But even then Paige wouldn’t stir a peg unless he could have the boss-ship. Greatest . . . four . . . boss-ship. Greatest . . . 4 . . . bosship. inserted in pencil by SLC, and deleted in pencil, presumably by Paine End of 1885. 1885. 1885. double rule Paige arrives at my house unheralded. [I was a small stockholder in the Farnham Co., but had seen seen retired from intercourse seen but little or nothing of Paige for a year or two.] He said “What’ll you complete the machine for?” “What will it cost?” “$20,000—certainly not over $30,000.” “What will you give?” “I’ll give you half.” “I’ll do it—but it—but it.”—but the limit must be $30,000.” “Hamersley’s a good fellow and will be invaluable to us—we can’t get along without him as our lawyer. Shan’t we give him a slice?” “Yes. How much?” “Shall we say a tenth?” “All right—yes.” rule triple rule The contract, (signed Feb. 6, 1886) was drawn by Hamersley. It is an excruciatingly absurd piece of paper. It bound me to requirements which had not been talked about, but they looked easy and I accepted them. But it was not till months months a months afterward that upon trying to sell a part of my interest to raise money for the machine I found I hadn’t any ownership of any kind. My 9/20 9/20 half in nine - 9/20 ‘nine-’ written over wiped-out ‘half in’ interest had become a purely conditional one. Failing the conditions, I would have nothing back but my $30,000 and 6 per cent interest. Hamersley was my trusted old friend, and as I thought, my lawyer also. I was spending $30,000 $30,000 $30,000 inserted in pencil, possibly by Paine to build his tenth of the machine. Yet he drew that contract and was present at the signing of it, and found nothing unrighteous about it. II II double rule II double rule The $30,000 lasted about a year, I should say. My contract was fulfilled, but Paige had fallen far short of finishing the machine—though he said he could finish it for $4,000; and could finish it and give it a big exhibition in New York for $10,000. After an interval, during which I did not see him, he applied for a loan of this money and offered to pay back double some day. I sent word that I would furnish the $4,000, but would take nothing but 6 per cent. (Witness, F. G. Whitmore.) When the $4,000 was gone, he said a little a little a few a little more would do. I furnished a little more and a little more, taking taking taking notes 6 per cent notes until at at at inserted in pencil, possibly by Paine last the machine was finished but not absolutely perfected. It could not have stood a lengthy test-exhibition. The notes then aggregated (with interest) about $53,000 or $55,000. I was out of pocket pocket pocket, more than $80,000, with nothing to show for it but the original idiotic contract. I then struck the idea of asking for royalties to raise money on. I asked for five hundred five hundred 500 . Paige said— “You can have as many as you want. I’ll give you a thousand.” I said no, I would take only only only five hundred. The royalty deed was made and signed. We were all feeling fine. Paige asked me to give him back his notes. I made Whitmore do it, though he strenuously objected. rule double rule I went on finishing the machine at the rate of $4,000 and upwards a month. I had no fears or doubts. [But I found royalties not very salable, and stopped trying to sell them.] them.] them. Hamersley was in a sweat to get a new contract out of Paige allowing a company to organize in the ordinary way in the ordinary way in the ordinary way and manufacture the machine. Presently Paige consented—and contract No. 2 was the result. It recognized my share. It recognized my share. It recognized my share. A rough one on me, but anything seemed better than the old contract—which was a mistake. A few months later contract No. 3 (the May contract contract contract ?) was made. It recognized my share. These were not promising contracts for a company to take hold of. Then came the “June” contract—a good and rational one. All this time these various contracts merely recognized my American rights. My foreign 9/20 were conditioned upon my paying the patent-expenses as they accrued (which I did) and the ultimate expenses of starting work in the foreign countries—a condition which has not yet arrived. Now none of the previous contracts actually gave me an ownership, but this June one gave me the machine and everything, bag and baggage. However, John P. Jones thought the foreign rights should be put into this contract, and I wrote to Paige to interline this addition. He sent for my copy of the June contract and Whitmore brought it and left it with him—which was a mistake. We couldn’t get it from him any more. He said it wasn’t wasn’t wasnt a real contract, because it had a blank in it (for his salary.) I came down from Onteora to see what the trouble was, and Whitmore urged me to stand out for the restoration of that stolen stolen oth stolen contract; but Paige insisted that a new one which he had been drawing up was much better. I signed it, and also assigned my foreign rights back to Paige, who now owned the entire thing (Hamersley’s shares, too) if this contract failed to materialize. It had but six six 6 months to run. After signing it I spoke doubtfully of my chances, and Paige Paige s Paige shed a few tears, as usual, and was deeply hurt at being doubted; asked me if he hadn’t always always allways taken care of me? and had he ever failed of his word with me? hadn’t he always said that no matter what happened (meaning (meaning I (meaning a falling-out—which I had suggested) I should have my 9/20 of every dollar he ever got out of the machine, domestic and foreign; that if he died (as I had suggested) his family would see to it that I got my 9/20. Then— “Here, Charley Davis, take a pen and write what I say.” He dictated and Davis wrote. “There, now,” said Paige, “are “are “does “are you satisfied now?” I went on footing the bills, and got the machine really perfected at last, at a full cost of about $150,000, instead of the original $30,000. I . . . $30,000. I . . . $30,000. squeezed in at the bottom of the page Ward tells me that Paige tried his best to cheat me out of my royalties when making a a a inserted in pencil, possibly by Paine contract with the Connecticut Co. Also that he tried to cheat out of all share Mr. North (inventor of the justifying mechanism;) but that North frightened him with with out with a lawsuit-threat, and is to get a royalty until the aggregate is $2,000,000. Paige and I always meet on effusively affectionate terms; and yet he knows perfectly well that if I had his nuts his nuts his nuts him ‘nuts’ deleted in ink by SLC; ‘his’ deleted and ‘him’ inserted in pencil, presumably by Paine in a steel-trap I would shut out all human succor and watch that trap till he died.