23 January 1906 Tuesday, January 23, title January 23, Jan. 213, 23, SLC inserted ‘21,’ then mended it ‘1’ to ‘3’ before rewriting ‘23’ for clarity Jan. 23, 1906 About the meeting at Carnegie Hall, in interest of Booker Washington’s Tuskegee Institute—Leads up to unpleasant political incident which happened to Mr. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell . There was a great mass meeting at Carnegie Hall last night, in the interest of Booker Washington’s Tuskegee Educational Institute in the South, and the interest which New York people feel in that Institute was quite manifest, in the fact that although it was not pleasant weather there were three thousand people inside the hall hall Hall and two thousand outside, who were trying to get in when the performances were ready to begin at eight o’clock. Mr. Choate presided, and was received with a grand welcome when he marched in upon the stage. He is fresh from his long stay in England, as our Ambassador, where he won the English people by the gifts of his heart, and won the royalties and the Government by his able diplomatic service, and captured the whole nation with his fine and finished oratory. For thirty-five years Choate has been the handsomest man in America. Last night he seemed to me to be just as handsome as he was thirty-five years ago, when I first knew him. And when I used to see him in England, five or six years ago, I thought him the handsomest man in that country. It was at a Fourth of July reception in Mr. Choate’s house in London that I first met Booker Washington. I have met him a number of times since, and he always impresses me pleasantly. Last night he was a mulatto. I didn’t notice it until he turned, while he was speaking, and said something to me. It was a great surprise to me to see that he was a mulatto, and had blue eyes. How unobservant a dull person can be. be. be.— be. Always, before, he was black, to me, and I had never noticed whether he had eyes at all, or not. He has accomplished a wonderful work in this quarter of a century. When he finished his education at the Hampton Colored School twenty-five years ago, he was unknown, and hadn’t a penny, nor a friend outside his immediate acquaintanceship. But by the persuasions of his carriage and address and the sincerity and honesty that look out of his eyes, he has been enabled to gather money by the hatful here in the North, and with it he has built up and firmly established his great school for the colored people of the two sexes in the South. In that school the students are not merely furnished a book education, but are taught thirty-seven useful trades. Booker Washington has scraped together many hundreds of thousands of dollars, in the twenty-five years, and with this money he has taught and sent forth into Southern fields among the colored people, six thousand trained colored men and women; and his student roll now numbers fifteen hundred names. The Institute’s property is worth a million and a half, and the establishment is in a flourishing condition. A most remarkable man is Booker Washington. And he is a fervent and effective speaker, on the platform. platform. platform. ¶ (Here insert the newspaper account of the meeting at Carnegie (of Jan. 22nd). The future editor of this biography can use what he chooses of it, or leave it out) platform. ¶ Here insert the newspaper account of the meeting at Carnegie (of Jan. 22nd). The future editor of this biography can use what he chooses of it, or leave it out) centered (Copied from Times of Jan. 22nd, 1906.) CHOATE AND TWAIN PLEAD FOR TUSKEGEE Brilliant Audience Cheers Them and Booker Washington. HUMORIST RAPS TAX DODGERS Says Everybody Swears, Especially Off—Friends of Negro Institution Trying to Raise $1,800,000 To give Booker T. Washington a good start toward collecting the $1,800,000 which he wants to carry back from the North to Tuskegee Institute, Mark Twain, Joseph H. Choate, Robert C. Ogden, and Dr. Washington himself spoke in Carnegie Hall last night. Incidentally, it was a “silver jubilee” celebration, since Tuskegee Institute was founded founded founded, founded in 1881. The big house was crowded to its utmost capacity, and there were as many more outside who would have gone in had there been room. The spectacle reminded one of the campaign days last November, when District Attorney Jerome and his attendant spellbinders were packing Carnegie Hall. But last night it was by no means a gathering of the “populace” alone. Women in brilliant gowns, resplendent with jewels, and men in evening dress filled the boxes. Despite the avowed object of the meeting—to get money from the audience and others—there was an atmosphere of good humor and light-heartedness light-heartedness light-heartedness light-heartedness . Mark Twain’s “teachings” were met with such volleys of laughter that the man who never grows old could hardly find intervals in which to deliver his precepts. That part of Mr. Clemens’s address which referred to wealthy men who swear off tax assessments was applauded with especial fervor. The occupants of the boxes included Mrs. John D. Rockefeller, Mrs. Henry H. Rogers, Mrs. Clarence H. Mackay, Mrs. Morris K. Jesup, J. G. Phelps Stokes, Isaac N. Seligman, George Foster Peabody, John Crosby Brown, Carl Schurz, Mrs. W. H. Schieffelin, Mrs. William Jay Schieffelin, Mrs. Joseph H. Choate, Mrs. Henry Villard, Nicholas Murray Butler, Mrs. Robert C. Ogden, Mrs. Cleveland H. Dodge, Mrs. Alfred Shaw, Mrs. Felix M. Warburg, Mrs. R. Fulton Cutting, Mrs. Collis P. Huntington, Mrs. Robert B. Minturn, Mrs. Jacob H. Schiff, Mrs. Paul M. Warburg, and Mrs. Arthur Curtis James. A negro octet sang between the speeches. Their songs were old-fashioned melodies and revival songs, and their deep, full voices filled the whole house. William Jay Schieffelin opened the meeting by telling its object and urging that all the help possible be given to Dr. Washington. He announced that in April a special train would leave New York for Tuskegee and that the round-trip ticket would cost $50, covering all expenses. On this occasion the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of Tuskegee will be celebrated at the school itself by speeches by Secretary of War Taft, President Eliot of Harvard, Bishop Galloway, and Andrew Carnegie. Choate Praises Washington. “We assemble to-night,” said Mr. Choate, when Mr. Schieffelin presented him, “to celebrate the ‘silver jubilee’ of Tuskegee Institute, twenty-five years old to-day, the success of which as a nucleus and centre of negro education in the South is the triumph and glory of Dr. Booker T. Washington. I believe he does not claim to be the originator of it. It began in 1881 in a shanty and with with not in thirty pupils. Now what do we behold? A great educational establishment with 2,300 acres and more than eight buildings, peculiarly fitted for the tasks they are supposed to assist. “It has sent forth more than 6,000 pupils as examples to and teachers of the negro race. It has now an enrollment of 1,500 pupils and an endowment fund of more than $1,000,000. Like all the other great educational institutions of to-day, the more it has and the more it wants the more it gets and the more it can use. “I read that in a recent speech Dr. Washington declared that he was proud of his race. I am sure his race is proud of him. And I know I can say that the great mass of the American people, both North and South, are also proud of him. And there are few Americans on whom European nations look with such peculiar interest and sympathy as Dr. Washington. It was my pleasure to see him in my own hired house [laughter] in London, surrounded by English men and English women, who were delighted to make his acquaintance and listen to his words. Negro Problem a Wide One. I read in a book, which I hope everybody has read, by Mr. Murphy, Secretary of the Southern Education Board, that the illiteracy of the negroes in the South has been wiped away more than one half since the war. How has it been accomplished? Out of the means of the Southern States. They have done nobly. By taxation $109,000,000 was raised between 1870 and 1900 for the education of negroes. How many people in the South—like some people we have had here in New York—stood between the appropriations and the recipients, I do not know, but it was a great achievement. “None of the Tuskegee graduates is in an asylum. It is not the educated negroes who make themselves enemies to the South; it is uneducated negroes. The desire for these Tuskegee graduates is greater than Tuskegee can satisfy. Integrity of the Races. “The maintenance of the integrity of the races, which, with the approval of both races, has formed the basis of Southern civilization, has given opportunity to negro lawyers, negro doctors, and ministers in every profession and industry, and the negroes are making the most of it.” Then Mr. Choate turned toward Mark Twain: “If I were to present the next speaker as Samuel L. Clemens,” he said, “some would ask, ‘Who is he?’ but when I present him as Mark Twain—” He could get no further. The applause which broke out lasted a full three minutes. “I heard him speak at the dinner on his seventieth birthday,” continued Mr. Choate, “and the gist of his speech was that he had never done any work in his life. He said he had never worked at anything he didn’t like, and so it wasn’t work at all. He said that when he had an interesting job before him he lay in bed all day. And to-day, I understand, he has been in bed all day.” When Mark Twain could be heard he said: MARK TWAIN’S ADDRESS. “These habits, of which Mr. Choate has told you, are the very habits which have kept me young until I am 70 years old. I have lain in bed all day to-day, expect to lie in bed all day to-morrow, and will continue to lie in bed all day throughout the year. There is nothing so refreshing, nothing is so comfortable, and nothing fits one so well for the kind of work which he calls pleasure. Mr. Choate has been careful not to pay me any compliments. It wasn’t because he didn’t want to—he just couldn’t think of any. “I came here in the responsible capacity of policeman—to watch Mr. Choate. This is an occasion of grave and serious importance, and it seemed necessary for me to be present so that if he tried to work off any statements that required correction, reduction, refutation or exposure there would be a tried friend of the public here to protect the house. But I can say in all frankness and gratitude that nothing of the kind has happened. He has not made one statement whose veracity fails to tally exactly with my own standard. I have never seen a person improve so. “This does not make me jealous. It only makes me thankful. Thankful and proud; proud of a country that can produce such men—two such men. And all in the same century. We can’t be with you always; we are passing away—passing away; soon we shall be gone, and then—well, everything will have to stop, I reckon. It is a sad thought. But in spirit I shall still be with you. Choate, too—if he can. Nothing to Refute. “There being nothing to explain, nothing to refute, nothing to excuse, there is nothing left for me to do now but resume my natural trade—which is teaching. At Tuskegee they thoroughly ground the student in the Christian code of morals; they instill into him the indisputable truth that this is the highest and best of all systems of morals; that morals; that morals that the Nation’s greatness, its strength, and its repute among the other nations is the product of that system; that it is the foundation upon which rests the American character; that whatever is commendable, whatever is valuable in the individual American’s character is the flower and fruit of that seed. “They teach him that this is true in every case, whether the man be a professing Christian or an unbeliever; for we have none but the Christian code of morals, and every individual is under its character-building powerful influence and dominion from the cradle to the grave; he breathes it in with his breath, it is in his blood and bone, it is the web and woof and fibre of his mental and spiritual heredities and ineradicable. And so every born American among the eighty millions, let his creed or destitution of creed be what it may, is indisputably a Christian to this degree—that his moral constitution is Christian. Two Codes of Morals. “All this is true, and no student will leave Tuskegee ignorant of it. Then what will he lack under this head? What is there for me to teach him under this head that he may possibly not acquire there, or may acquire in a not sufficiently emphasized form? Why this large fact, this important fact—that there are two separate and distinct kinds of Christian morals, so separate, so distinct, so unrelated that they are no more kin to each other than are archangels and politicians. The one kind is Christian private morals, the other is Christian public morals. “The loyal observance of Christian private morals has made this Nation what it is—a clean and upright people in its private domestic life, an honest and honorable people in its private commercial life; no alien nation can claim superiority over it in these regards, no critic, foreign or domestic, can challenge the validity of this truth. During 363 days in the year the American citizen is true to his Christian private morals, and keeps undefiled the Nation’s character at its best and highest; then in the other two days of the year he leaves his Christian private morals at home, and carries his Christian public morals to the tax office and the polls and does the best he can to damage and undo his whole year’s faithful and righteous worth. Political Morality. “Without a blush he will vote for an unclean boss if that boss is his party’s Moses, without compunction he will vote against the best man in the whole land if he is on the other ticket. Every year, in a number of cities and States, he helps to put corrupt men in office, every year he helps to extend the corruption wider and wider; year after year he goes on gradually rotting the country’s political life, whereas if he would but throw away his Christian public morals and carry his Christian private morals to the polls he could promptly purify the public service and make the possession of office a high and honorable distinction and one to be coveted by the very best men the country could furnish. But now—well, now he contemplates his unpatriotic work and sighs and grieves and blames every man but the right one—which is himself. As to Tax Dodgers. “Once a year he lays aside his Christian private morals and hires a ferryboat and piles up his bonds in a warehouse in New Jersey for three days, and gets out his Christian public morals and goes to the Tax Office and holds up his hand and swears he wishes he may never—never if he’s got a cent in the world, so help him! The next day the list appears in the papers—a column and a quarter of names in fine print, and every man in the list a billionaire and a member of a couple of churches. “I know all those people. I have friendly, social, and criminal intercourse with the whole of them. They never miss a sermon when they are so as to be around, and they never miss swearing-off day, whether they are so as to be around or not. The innocent cannot remain innocent in the disintegrating atmosphere of this thing. I used to be an honest man. I am crumbling. No—I have crumbled. When they assessed me at $75,000 a fortnight ago I went out and tried to borrow the money, and couldn’t; then when I found they were letting a whole crop of millionaires live in New York at a third of the price they were charging me I was hurt. I was indignant, and said: ‘This is the last feather! I am not going to run this town all by myself.’ In that moment—in that memorable moment—I began to crumble. Mark Twain Disintegrates. “In fifteen minutes the disintegration was complete. In fifteen minutes I was become just a mere moral sandpile, and I lifted up my hand along with those seasoned and experienced deacons and swore off every rag of personal property I’ve got in the world, clear down to cork leg, glass eye, and what is left of my wig. “Those tax officers were moved, they were profoundly moved; they had long been accustomed to seeing hardened old grafters act like that, and they could endure the spectacle; but they were expecting better things of me, a chartered professional moralist, and they were saddened. I fell visibly in their respect and esteem, and I should have fallen in my own, except that I had already struck bottom and there wasn’t any place to fall to. Does a Gentleman Swear Off? “At Tuskegee they will jump to misleading conclusions from insufficient evidence, along with Dr. Parkhurst, and they will deceive the student with the superstition that no gentleman ever swears. Look at those good millionaires; aren’t they gentlemen? Well, they swear. Only once a year, maybe, but there’s enough bulk to it to make up for the lost time. And do they lose anything by it? No, they don’t; they save enough in three minutes to support the family seven years. When they swear do we shudder? No—unless they say damn. Then we do. It shrivels us all up. “Yet we ought not to feel so about it, because we all swear—everybody. Including the ladies. Including Dr. Parkhurst, that strong and brave and excellent citizen, but superficially educated. For it is not the word that is the sin, it is the spirit back of the word. When an irritated lady says ‘Oh!’ the spirit back of it is ‘damn,’ and that is the way it is going to be recorded against her. It always makes me so sorry when I hear a lady swear like that. But if she says ‘damn,’ and says it in an amiable, nice way, it isn’t going to be recorded at all. “The idea that no gentleman ever swears is all wrong; he can swear and still be a gentleman if he does it in a nice and benevolent and affectionate way. The historian John Fiske, whom I knew well and loved, was a spotless and most noble and upright Christian gentleman, and yet he swore once. Not exactly that, maybe; still he—but I will tell you about it. “One day when he was deeply immersed in his work his wife came in much moved and profoundly distressed, and said, ‘I am sorry to disturb you, John, but I must, for this is a serious matter, and needs to be attended to at once.’ Then, lamenting, she brought a grave accusation against their little son. She said: ‘He has been saying his Aunt Mary is a fool and his Aunt Martha is a damned fool.’ Mr. Fiske reflected upon the matter a minute, then said: ‘Oh, well, it’s about the distinction I should make between them myself.’ “Mr. Washington, I beg you to convey these teachings to your great and prosperous and most beneficent educational institution, and add them to the prodigal mental and moral riches wherewith you equip your fortunate protégés for the struggle of life.” Robert C. Ogden, after his introduction by Mr. Choate, said that before he began his formal address, which was “Financial Rousement” of the occasion, occasion, occasion he wanted to answer Mark Twain’s remarks on profanity. “I want to say,” said Mr. Ogden, “that my friend’s allusions to the ethics of profanity are not at all original. I knew all about them years ago, and he would not have known as much as he does had he never lived in Hartford. I remember hearing a distinguished Puritan say once there, banging his fist on the desk in front of him during a debate, that he’d be damned if he would allow such a proposition to go through. In answer to this Henry Clay Trumbull said that it was fine to see a man who could say damn with such profound reverence.” Mr. Ogden then went on to tell the needs of Tuskegee. He said that the best intelligence of the country, North and South, admitted the peculiar educational duty that was owing to the negroes that had become a part of the population of the Nation. Applause for Washington. Mr. Ogden said that there were three distinct appeals. An added income of $90,000 a year was needed, an added endowment of $1,800,000 was essential, and a heating plant, to cost $34,000, was necessary. Just before Booker T. Washington entered the hall a messenger boy handed him a note from Thomas Dixon, Jr., in which the writer said he would contribute $10,000 to Tuskegee if Mr. Washington would state at the meeting that he did not desire social equality for the negro, and that Tuskegee was opposed to the amalgamation of the races. When asked what he had to say on the subject Mr. Washington said: “I will make no answer whatever. I have nothing to say.” Mr. Washington got a fine reception when he came forward to speak, and there was great applause when he said in the course of his address: “One point we might consider as settled. We are through experimenting and speculating as to where the ten millions of black people are to live. We have reached the unalterable determination that we are going to remain here in America, and the greater part of us are going to remain for all time in the Southern States. In this connection I do not hesitate to say that from my point of view the great body of our people find a more encouraging opportunity in the South than elsewhere. “Since we are to forever constitute a part of the citizenship of this country, there is but one question to be answered: Shall we be among the best citizens or among the worst? “Every race of people should be judged by its best type, not by its lowest,” said Mr. Washington. “One has no right to pass judgment upon a people until he has taken the pains to see something of their progress, after they have had a reasonable chance. “Wherever we have been able to reach the people through education they have improved morally at a rapid pace, and crime has decreased. After making diligent inquiry we cannot find a single man or woman who holds a diploma from the Hampton Institute in Virginia or the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama in the walls of a penitentiary. “No two groups of people can live side by side where one is in ignorance and poverty without its condition affecting the other. The black man must be lifted or the white man will be injured in his moral and spiritual life. The degradation of the one will mean the degradation of the other. “I do not overlook the seriousness of the problem that is before us, nor do I set any limits upon the growth of my race. In my opinion, it is the most important and far-reaching problem that the Nation has had before it; but you cannot make equally good citizens where in one part of the country a child has $1.50 expended for his education and in another part of the country another child has $20 spent for his enlightenment. “The negro in many ways has proved his worth and loyalty to this country. What he now asks is that through such institutions as Hampton, Fisk, and Tuskegee he shall be given the chance to render high and intelligent service to our country in the future. I have faith that such an opportunity will be given him.” When the affair was over, and the people began to climb up on the stage and pass along and shake hands, the usual thing happened. It always happens. I shake hands with people who used to know my mother intimately in Arkansas, in New Jersey, in California, in Jericho Jericho Jerico —and I have to seem so glad and so happy to meet these persons who knew in this intimate way one who was so near and dear to me. And this is the kind of thing that gradually turns a person into a polite liar and deceiver, for my mother was never in any of those places. One pretty creature was glad to see me again, and remembered being at my house in Hartford—I don’t know when, a great many years ago, it was. Now she was mistaking me for somebody else. It couldn’t couldn’t couldn’t couldn’t have happened to her. But I was very cordial, because she was very pretty. And I said “I have been longing to meet you these many, many years, for you have been celebrated throughout all the ages. You are the ‘unborn child.’ ‘unborn child.’ “unborn child.” From the beginning of time, you have been used as a symbol. When people want to be emphatic—when they want to reach the utmost limit of lack of knowledge—they say ‘He is as innocent as the unborn child; he is as ignorant as the unborn child.’ You were not there, at the time you think of, except in spirit. You hadn’t arrived in the flesh.” She was very nice. We might have had a good long chat except for the others that I had to talk with and work up reminiscences that belonged in somebody else’s experiences, not my own. There was one young fellow, brisk, but not bright, overpoweringly pleasant and cordial, in his way. He said his mother used to teach school in Elmira, New York New York N.Y. , where he was born and bred and where the family continued to reside, and that she would be very glad to know that he had met me, and shaken hands, for he said “She is always talking about you. She holds you in high esteem, although, as she says, she has to confess that of all the boys that ever she had in her school, you were the most troublesome.” “Well,” I said, “those were my last school days, and through long practice in being troublesome, I had reached the summit by that time, because I was more than thirty-three years old.” It didn’t affect him in the least. I don’t think he even heard what I said he said he said—, he said he was so eager to tell me all about it, and I said to him once more, so as to spare him, and me, that I was never in a schoolhouse schoolhouse school-house in Elmira, New York New York N.Y. , even on a visit, and that his mother must be mistaking me for some of the Langdons, the family into which I married. No matter, he didn’t hear it—kept on his talk with animation and delight, and has gone to tell his mother, I don’t know what. He didn’t get anything out of me to tell her, for he never heard anything I said. These episodes used to vex me, years and years ago. But they don’t vex me now. I am older. If a person thinks that he has known me at some time or other, all I require of him is that he shall consider it a distinction to have known me; me; me; some time; me; and then, as a rule, I am perfectly willing to remember all about it and add some things that he has forgotten. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell came down from Hartford to be present at that meeting, and we chatted and smoked after we got back home. And reference was made again to that disastrous Boston speech which I made at Whittier’s seventieth birthday dinner; and Joe asked me if I was still minded to submit that speech to that Club in Washington, day after to-morrow, where Colonel Colonel Col. Harvey and I are to be a couple of the four four four Hobby queried this word on TS1, and SLC canceled her query guests. And I said “No,” I had given that up—which was true. Because I have examined that speech a couple of times since, and have have I have have changed my notion about it—changed it entirely. I find it gross, coarse coarse coarse course ,—well, I needn’t go on with particulars. I didn’t like any part of it, from the beginning to the end. I found it always offensive and detestable. How do I account for this change of view? I don’t know. I can’t account for it. I am the person concerned. If I could put myself outside of myself and examine it from the point of view of a person not personally concerned in it, then no doubt I could analyze it and explain to my satisfaction the change which has taken place. As it is, I am merely moved by instinct. My instinct said, formerly, that it was an innocent speech, and funny. The same instinct, sitting cold and judicial, as a court of last resort, has reversed that verdict. I expect this latest verdict to remain.May 25. It did remain—until day before yesterday; then I gave it a final and vigorous reading—aloud—and dropped straight back to my former admiration of it. M. T. + ftnt remain.* footnote: ¶ *May 25 . . . M. T. remain.* footnote: ¶ *May 25 . . . M. T. remain.* footnote: no ¶ *May 25th. . . . M. T. I don’t remove the speech from the autobiography, because I think that this change of mind about it is interesting, whether the speech is or not, and therefore let it it ist it stay. stay. stay. stay. “287 Quincy Street Jan. 31st, 1906. My Dear Mr. Clemens, ¶ Your very kind note and—later on—the promised copy of the old ‘Atlantic Monthly’ reading reached me safely. The latter gives great delight to our three big sons and strikes Mr. Hudson and myself as being as full of fun as ever. Accept our most cordial thanks for your kindness in sending it. I now know—what I always strongly suspected—that our ‘Mark Twain’ is not only our greatest humorist but a most kindly one besides. Very Gratefully Yours, Laura K. Hudson.” Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell had a letter with him which interested me, and, by request, he left it with me, to be returned to him after I shall have used it. This letter is from the Reverend Reverend Rev. Charles Stowe, a son of Harriet Beecher Stowe. The letter is now about two months old—but in that time Joe has pretty nearly worn it out, reading it to people. That is, reading a certain passage in it to people. He read that passage to me, to wit: I was I was “I was reading in the volume of Rev. Dr. Burton’s “Remains,” “Remains,” ‘Remains,’ as the old folks used to say, your remarks at his funeral. I think for beauty of diction, richness of thought and delicacy and strength of psychological analysis, it is up to any of the masters of our tongue. The passage I admire most of all is the one beginning “Men marked the sunshine in him,” “Men . . . him,” ‘Men . . . him,’ etc. I think the whole thing a gem, but this passage is a masterpiece of beautiful and dignified English. It is a shame that men like Dr. Parker and Dr. Burton are in the battle of life, in a way—no, that men like you and Dr. Burton are in a way in a way in a way in the battle of life in a way like the 130-gun ships of the Spanish fleet at Trafalgar, Trafalgar, Trafalgar Trafalgar, outclassed by pigmies. pigmies. pigmies.” And Joe said “Mark, what do you think of that?” I said “Well, Joe, I don’t want to commit myself. Send me the passage, and then I will furnish my opinion.” Joe said “You know the charm of this whole thing lies in the fact that it wasn’t I that did that wonderful gem—it was Parker.” But Twichell is getting a lot of satisfaction out of it. Some time ago, his daughters gathered together a large company of their young friends of the two sexes, and while they were in the midst of their banquet Joe came in and greeted them, and was welcomed. But, necessarily, with his gray head, he was in a considerable degree an embarrassment, and the hilarity without perhaps entirely breaking off, was diminished to the proper degree of reverence for Joe’s cloth and age. That being just the right atmosphere—just the right conditions, for an impressive reading of that passage in this letter, Joe read it with apparent pride, and almost juvenile vanity—while those young people dropped their eyes in pity for an old man who could display his vanities in such a way and take such a childish delight in them. Joe’s daughters turned crimson; glanced at each other, and were ready to cry over this humiliating exhibition. Then of course Twichell finished his performance by informing them that these praises were all deserved, but not by him—for Mr. Stowe had made a mistake. If he had gone and taken another look at that passage which he so highly praised, he would have noticed that it was the work of Rev. Dr. Parker, and not of himself. At one of the Monday morning meetings of the clergy Twichell did the same thing. And with such excellent effect that in the midst of his reading Parker himself spoke out and said “Now Joe, this is too much. We know you can do fine things; we know you can do wonderful things; but you never did anything as wonderful as this that Charley Charley Charlie Stowe is talking about. He is no competent critic, that is quite manifest. There isn’t anything in English Literature Literature Literature literature worthy of such an intemperate encomium encomium encomium enconium as this that Charley Charley Charlie Stowe is passing on your Burton speech.” Then Joe explained that Parker was only damaging himself, because it was Parker’s speech he was reading about. Parker is still in the harness. He has been shepherd of the same congregation—its children, and its grandchildren, and its great-grandchildren—for forty-six years. Joe says he is just as marvelous an artist in English phrasing, and just as fine and deep in thought as ever he was. To my knowledge, this is saying a great deal. For Parker was one of our remarkable men when I knew him in the old Hartford days, and we had eight or ten men in that town who were ’way ’way way above the average. Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s congregation—the only congregation he has ever had since he entered the ministry—celebrated the fortieth anniversary of his accession to that pulpit, a couple of weeks ago. Joe entered the army as chaplain in the very beginning of the Civil War Civil War civil war . He was a young chap, and had just been graduated from Yale, and the Yale Theological Seminary. He made all the campaigns of the Army of the Potomac. When he was mustered out, that congregation I am speaking of called him, and he has served them ever since, and always to their satisfaction—except once. I have found among my old manuscripts manuscripts MSS. one which I perceive to be about twenty-two years old. It has a heading, and looks as if I had meant it to serve as a magazine article. article. article. period written in black ink over what may be a period inserted by Hobby article. I can clearly see, now, why I didn’t print it. It is full of indications that its inspiration was what happened to Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell about that time, and which produced a situation for him which he will not forget until he is dead, if he even forgets it then. then. them. then. SLC first tried to mend ‘m’ to an ‘n’ and then rewrote the entire word then. I think I can see, see, see, see, all through this artful article, article, article, article, that I was trying to hint at Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , and the episode of that preacher whom I met on the street, and hint at various things that were exasperating me. And now that I read that old article, I perceive that I probably saw that my art was not ingenious enough—that I hadn’t covered Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell up, and hadn’t covered up the episode that I was hinting at—that anybody in Hartford could read everything between the lines that I was trying to conceal. I will insert this venerable article in this place, and then take up that episode in Joe’s history and tell about it. it. it. ¶ (Put old MS. here). The Character of Man The Character of Man The Character of Man rule The Character of Man. Concerning Man—he Concerning Man—he It Concerning Man—he revised in black ink Concerning Man—he is too large a subject to be treated as a whole; so I will merely merely tou merely merely discuss a detail or two of him at this time. time. time—presently.. insertion in gray ink, deletion in black ink time. I desire to contemplate him him him Man him him from this point of view—this premiss: premiss: premise—ss: revised in black ink premise that he was not made made made not in for any useful purpose, for the reason that he hasn’t served served accomplished served served any; that he was most likely not even made intentionally intentionally intentionally intentionally originally ‘in-tentionally’; underscore added to ‘tentionally’ ; and that his working himself up out of the oyster bed to his present position was probably matter of surprise and regret surprise and regret re- surprise and surprise and regret surprise and regret to the Creator. * * * * Creator. * * * * Creator; + + + + plus marks (indicating an ellipsis) inserted in black ink to replace the following passage, canceled in black ink: that if he was made intentionally, it he was not that he might be saved or damned, since he is plainly peculiarly conspicuously not worth that trouble, but was more probably merely made intended as an annoyance—a thing to do for the Creator the office which other vermin do for us. If that is really what he was made for, his creation does at last seem rational, explicable, even excusable, in a measure—for the office fits his size bulk and his merit. ‘it’ canceled and ‘he’ interlined in pencil; substitution of ‘he’ for ‘it’ confirmed in black ink; revision of ‘peculiarly’ to ‘conspicuously’ in black ink; ‘not . . . more’ canceled in pencil; entire passage canceled in black ink Creator. . . . . . . For his history, in all climes, all ages and all circumstances, furnishes oceans and continents of proof that of all the creatures that were made he is the most detestable. Of the entire brood he is the only one—the solitary one—that possesses malice. That is the basest of all instincts, passions, vices—the most hateful. hateful. despicable. hateful. hateful. That one thing puts him below the rats, the grubs, the trichinæ trichinæ trichinæ trichinæ ligature above ‘ae’ added . He is the only creature that inflicts pain for sport, sport, sport., sport, knowing it to be pain. But if the cat knows she is inflicting pain when she plays with the frightened mouse, then we must make an exception here; we must grant that in one detail man is the moral peer of the cat. All creatures kill—there seems to be no exception; but of the whole list, man is the only one that kills for fun; he is the only one that kills in malice, the only one that kills for revenge. Also—in all the list he is the only creature that has a nasty mind. Also—in . . . mind. Also— In all the list he is the only creature that has a dirty soiled nasty mind. ‘Also’ inserted in black ink; ‘soiled’ added in pencil, then canceled in black ink Also—in . . . mind. Shall he be extolled extolled saved extolled revised in pencil extolled for his noble qualities, for his gentleness, his sweetness, his amiability, his lovingness lovingness mag- lovingness lovingness , his courage, his devotion, his patience, his fortitude, his prudence, the various charms and graces of his spirit? The other animals share all these with him, yet are free from the blacknesses and rottennesses of his character. character. character. followed by four paragraphs canceled in pencil, then in black ink; the fifth paragraph (‘So . . . detail:’) was added, and then canceled, in black ink: ¶ Upon what quality, what pretext then, shall he arrogate to himself the position of the Deity’s chosen creature?—His intellect? Will that enable him to adorn heaven? It is like dis the like the strained wisdom of discarding gas and electricity of to pile putrid dead bodiesdecayed corpses in the family circle for the sake of the sake of the phosphorescent light that issues from them. ¶ Is it free will? He hasn’t any more free will than the other creatures. ¶ He has the instinct disposition to do mean and vicious things—and he restrains himself from doing them. Does that make him pleasanter choicer company for the blest than the lamb, the calf, the horse, the bug that hasn’t any such disposition? Look at him as you may, there is no rational argument in his favor. Yet he blandly shoves himself forward as the pet of the Deity—the Deity’s chosen animal. We should not forget that the Deity has been accused of picking out the Jews for his favorite people. Those who know that race, know how wanton was that charge. This should make us modester; it should guard us from too readily jumping to gushy and grotesque conclusions from fantastic and irrational premises. ¶ Take one detail. Sham? or “Nature”. ¶ So much by way of generalization, as regards man and his character. Let us strip him and examine him a little by detail: character. . . . . . . . . . . * * * * There * * * * There centered Accepted Lies. triple rule + + + + There ‘take seriously’ written and canceled in the top left corner of the MS page There are certain sweet-smelling sugar-coated sweet-smelling sugar-coated colossal sweet-smelling sugar-coated revised in black ink sweet-smelling sugar-coated lies current in the world which all politic men have apparently tacitly conspired together to support and perpetuate. One of these is, that there is such a thing in the world in the world in the world in the world as independence: independence of thought, independence of opinion opinion action opinion opinion , independence of action. Another is, that the world loves to see see see ‘see’ underscored in black ink see independence—admires it, applauds it. Another is, that there is such a thing in the world in the world in the world in the world as toleration—in religion, in politics, and such matters; and with it trains that already mentioned auxiliary lie that toleration is admired, and applauded. Out of these trunk-lies spring many branch ones: to wit, the lie to wit, the lie to-wit, the lie to wit, the lie that not all men are slaves; the lie the lie the lie the lie that men are glad when other men succeed; glad when they prosper; prosper; prosper; glad to see them; prosper; glad to see them reach lofty heights; sorry to see them fall again. And yet other branch-lies branch-lies branch lies : to wit to wit to-wit , that there is heroism in man; that he is not mainly made up of malice and treachery; that he is sometimes not a coward; that there is something about him that ought to be perpetuated—in heaven, or hell, or somewhere somewhere some where somewhere . And these other branch-lies, to wit to wit to-wit : that conscience, man’s moral medicine chest, man’s moral medicine chest, man’s moral medicine chest, man’s moral medicine chest, is not only created by the Creator, but is put into man ready-charged with the right and and and and only true and authentic correctives of conduct—and the duplicate the duplicate the same the duplicate the duplicate chest, with the self-same correctives, unchanged, unmodified, distributed to all nations and all epochs epochs ag epochs epochs . And yet one other branch-lie, to wit to wit to-wit , that I am I, and you are you; that we are units, individuals, and have natures of our own our own our own originally ‘our own’; underscore canceled our own , instead of being the tail-end of a tape-worm eternity tape-worm eternity Siamese-twin tape-worm procession eternity tape-worm eternity of ancestors extending in linked procession back—and back—and back— back—and back—and back— a billion years back—and back—and back— back—and back—and back— to our source in the monkeys, with this so-called individuality of ours a decayed and rancid mush of inherited instincts and teachings derived, atom by atom, stench by stench, from the entire line of that sorry column, and not so much new and original matter in it as you could balance on a needle point and examine under a microscope. This makes well nigh fantastic the suggestion makes well nigh fantastic the suggestion lie is the lie makes grotesque well nigh fantastic the suggestion revised in black ink makes . . . suggestion that there can be such a thing as a personal, original and responsible nature in a man, separable from that in him which is not original, and findable in such quantity as to enable the observer to say, This This This this is a man, not a procession. * * * * Consider procession. ¶ * * * * Consider procession. ‖ 2 MS pages (5 and 6) removed at this point + + + + ¶ Consider procession. . . . . . . no ¶ Consider that first mentioned lie: that there is such a thing in the world as independence; that it exists in individuals, that it exists in bodies of men. Surely if anything is proven, by whole oceans and continents of evidence, it is that the quality of independence was almost wholly left out of the human race. The scattering scattering scattering scattering exceptions to the rule the rule the the rule the rule only emphasize it, light it up, make it glare. The whole population of New England meekly took their turns, for years, in standing up in the railway trains, without so much as a complaint above their breath, till at last these uncounted millions were able to produce exactly one single independent man, who stood to his rights and made the railroad give him a seat. Statistics Statistics It will probably take Statistics Statistics and the law of probabilities warrant warrant will warrant warrant the assumption that it will take New England forty years to breed his fellow. fellow. fellow. ‘H. L. Goodwin’ interlined in pencil above ‘fellow.’, probably by SLC, and later canceled by him in ink fellow. There is a law, with a penalty attached, forbidding trains to occupy the Asylum street crossing more than five minutes at a time. For years people and carriages and carriages and carriages and carriages used used w used used to wait there nightly nightly ni nightly corrected miswriting nightly as much as twenty minutes on a stretch while New New New Eng trains stood ‖ New New England trains monopolized that crossing. I I I never heard of any one objecting—in court. I used to hear men use vigorous language about that insolent wrong—but they waited, just the same. We are discreet discreet discreet discreet sheep; we wait to see how the drove is going, and then go with the drove. We have two opinions: one private, which we are afraid to express; and another one—the one we use—which we force ourselves to wear to please Mrs. Grundy, until habit makes us comfortable in it, and the custom of defending it presently makes us love it, adore it, and forget how pitifully we came by it. Look at it it it it in politics. Look at the candidates whom we loathe, one year, and are afraid to vote against the next; whom we cover with unimaginable filth, one year, and fall down on the public platform and worship, the next—and keep on doing it until the the the the habitual shutting of our eyes to last year’s year’s years’ year’s evidences brings us presently to a sincere and stupid belief in this year’s.Jan. 11, ’06. It is long ago, but it plainly means Blaine. M. T. + ftnt year’s.* footnote: ¶ *Jan. 11, ’06 . . . M. T. year’s.* footnote: no ¶ *Jan. 11/06 . . . M. T. year’s.* footnote: no ¶ *Jan. 11, ’06 . . . M. T. Look at the tyranny of party—at at at at what is called party allegiance, party loyalty—a snare snare foolish snare snare invented by designing designing s designing designing men for selfish purposes—and which turns voters into chattels, slaves, rabbits; and all the while, their masters, and they themselves are shouting rubbish about liberty, liberty, liberty, liberty, independence, freedom of opinion, freedom of speech, honestly unconscious of the fantastic contradiction; and forgetting or ignoring that their fathers and the churches shouted the same blasphemies a generation earlier when they when they whenever they when they were closing their doors against the hunted slave, beating his handful of humane defenders with Bible-texts and billies, and pocketing the insults and licking the shoes of his Southern master. If we would learn what the human race really is, at bottom, we need only observe it in election times. A Hartford clergyman clergyman clergyman *OVER ‘*OVER’ inserted and canceled in black ink; followed by a passage revised in pencil and then canceled in ink: —and one of the very best maen in this town, by long odds prest c excepted — clergyman met me in the street, and spoke of a new nominee—denounced the nomination, in strong, earnest earnest manly earnest earnest words—words that were refreshing for their independence, their manliness. Jan. 11, ’06. I can’t remember his name. It began with K, I think. He was one of the American revisers of the New Testament, and was nearly as great a scholar as Hammond Trumbull. + ftnt manliness.† footnote: ¶ †Jan. 11, ’06 . . . Trumbull. manliness. footnote inserted on verso with instructions to turn over: ¶ *Jan. 11, ’06. I can’t . . . Trumbull. manliness. * footnote: no ¶ *Jan. 11, ’06. I can’t . . . Trumbull. He said, “I ought to be proud, perhaps, for this nominee this nominee theis nominee this nominee is a relative of mine of mine of mine of mine ; on the contrary I am humiliated and disgusted; for I know him intimately—familiarly—and I know that he is an unscrupulous scoundrel, scoundrel, scoundrel, scoundrel, and always has been.” You should have seen this clergyman this clergyman him this clergyman revised in black ink this clergyman preside at a political meeting forty forty thir forty forty days later; and urge, and plead, and gush gush gush—for this same nominee gush —and you should have heard him paint the character of this same nominee. You would have supposed he was describing the Cid, and Great-heart, and Sir Galahad, and Bayard the Spotless all rolled into one. the Cid . . . into one. God. the Deity. inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over: the Cid, and Great-heart, and Sir Galahad, and Bayard the Spotless all rolled into one. ‘the Deity.’ canceled in pencil and the instruction to turn over inserted, also in pencil; the insertion on the verso written in black ink the Cid . . . into one. Was he sincere? Yes—by that time —by that time —by that time —by that time ; and therein lies the pathos of it all, the hopelessness hopelessness hopelessness hopelessness of it all. It shows at what trivial cost of effort a man can teach himself a lie, and learn to believe it, when he perceives, by the general drift, that that is the popular thing to do. Does he believe his lie yet? Oh, probably not; he has no further use for it. It was but a passing incident; he spared to it the moment that was its due, then hastened back to the serious business of his life. life. life.—the saving of souls; scraping them together, with a holy joy, to improve the society of heaven. ‘—the . . . heaven.’ canceled in pencil life. And what And what textual note: These words begin on a new MS page, following a page that is only half filled; the new page was first numbered 12 and then renumbered 15. a paltry poor lie is that one which teaches that independence of action and opinion is prized in men, admired, honored, rewarded. When a man leaves a political party, he is treated as if the party owned him—as if he were its bond slave, as most party men plainly are—and had stolen himself, gone off with what was not his own. And he he he he is traduced, derided, despised, held up to public obloquy and loathing. His character is remorselessly assassinated; no means, however vile, are spared to injure injure his injure injure his property and his business. business. business. If I may speak personally, take my own case. A year ago I had a friend in every newspaper in the land, and a reputation which was worth almost any commonplace man’s having. I cast a vote for conscience sake, and now if anybody values my reputation it is not I. the canceled words ‘speak personally’ begin an MS page that was first numbered 13, then 15, and finally 16 business. The preacher who casts a vote for for of for for conscience’ sake, runs the risk of starving. And is rightly served; for he has been teaching a falsity falsity lie falsity revised in pencil falsity —that that that there is such a thing as freedom of opinion, not merely by a fiction of law, but in gracious and fruitful fact—and that that men respect respect respect it respect and honor independence of thought and action. honor . . . action. honor it. honor independence of thought and action. honor . . . action. Mr. Beecher Mr. Beecher textual note: These words begin an MS page that was first numbered 16 and then renumbered 17. may be charged with a a a a crime, and his whole following following church following revised in pencil following will rise as one man, and stand by him to the bitter end; but who so poor to be his friend when he is charged with casting a vote for conscience’ conscience’ conscience sake? Take the editor so charged—take—take anybody. All the talk talk goody-goody soft talk talk about tolerance, in anything or anywhere, is plainly a gentle gentle windy gentle gentle lie. It does not not not not exist. exist. exist.—either in man or God his Maker—if the Bible knows. exist. It is in no man’s heart; but it unconsciously and by moss-grown inherited habit, unconsciously . . . habit, unconsciously . . . habit, unconsciously . . . habit, drivels and slobbers from all men’s men’s mens’ men’s lips. Intolerance is everything for one’s self, and nothing for the other person. The main-spring main-spring bottom main-spring main-spring of man’s nature is just that—selfishness. selfishness. selfishness. followed by two paragraphs (almost two MS pages) that were first struck out in pencil, then canceled in black ink: ¶ What a fine irony it was to devise the Christian religion for such as candidate he—with its golden array of impossibilities: Give all thou hast to the poor; if a man smite thee on thy right cheek; if a man borrow thy coat of thee; if a man require thee to go with him a mile; do unto others as you would that others should do unto you; love thy neighbor as thyself. It has supplanted the old religion which went before it—upon men’s lips it has. But not in their hearts. That old religion ne knew men better than this one, and must outlive it : a billion years: for it says, “Smite those people hip and thigh; burn all they possess with fire; kill the cattle; kill the old men, and the women, and the young children, and the sucklings, and spare nothing that has life; for their opinions are not like ours.” ¶ Let us skip some of the lies, for brevity’s sake. Truth is mighty, and will prevail. I may be partial, but I think that that remark is in itself the compactest and the most symmetrical lie that has been constructed by man. It is pemmican. Why, we are so accustomed to feeding on lies, that we can’t ‖ selfishness. Let us skip the other lies, for brevity’s sake. To consider them would prove nothing, except that man is what he is—loving, toward his own, lovable, to his own,—his family, his friends—and otherwise the buzzing, busy, trivial, enemy of his race—who tarries his little day, does his little dirt, commends himself to God, God, God, whom he thinks has been watching him, ‘m’ canceled in pencil; the entire phrase canceled in black ink God, and then goes out into the darkness, to return no more, and send no messages back back to say if it back back —selfish even in death. death. death. followed by a passage canceled in black ink: What a poor little creature he is, with his airs and his importance, and his wise cogitations about the Deity his Maker and the hereafter. Whereas if one would ‖ revised in pencil death.