30 August 1906 Thursday, August 30, 1906 Mr. Clemens’s method of writing stories—Tells how some of his stories were commenced, how they were sometimes left for several years unfinished—Some of them have never been finished—Trouble with telephones—Miss Lyon’s long-distance message to Clara Clemens—Mr. Scovel Scovel Scovil gives a clause of telephone law. I was never willing to destroy “Captain Stormfield’s Visit to Heaven.” Now and then, in the past thirty years, I have overhauled my literary stock and transferred some of it to the fire, but “Stormfield’s Visit” always escaped. Secretly and privately I liked it, I couldn’t help it. But never mind about that, I wish to speak of something else now. I was . . . escaped. Secretly . . . it. But . . . now. I was . . . escaped. I am obliged to suspect that the hand of Providence was in it. Secretly and privately I liked it, I couldn’t help it. I was . . . escaped. I am obliged to suspect that the hand of Providence was in it. Secretly and privately I liked it, I couldn’t help it. But never mind about that, I wish to speak of something else now. deletion of ‘I am . . . in it.’ and insertion of ‘Secretly . . . help it.’ transferred from TS1 ribbon by Lyon; ‘But . . . now.’ inserted by SLC; then he wrote ‘INSERT these half-dozen lines.’ in the margin, changed his mind, then canceled the instruction and the entire passage There [¶] There ¶ There has never been a time in the past thirty-five years when my literary shipyard shipyard ship-yard hadn’t two or more half-finished ships on the ways, neglected and baking in the sun; generally there have been three or four; at present there are five. four; at present there are five. four. At present inserted and erased four.; at present there are five. period mended to a semicolon This has an unbusiness-like look, but it was not purposeless, it was intentional. As long as a book would write itself I was a faithful and interested amanuensis, and my industry did not flag; flag; flag,; comma mended to a semicolon flag, but the minute that the book tried to shift to my head the labor of contriving its situations, inventing its adventures and conducting its conversations, I put it away and dropped it out of my mind. Then I examined my unfinished properties to see if among them there might not be one whose interest in itself had revived, through a couple of years’ restful restful restful idleness, and was ready to take me on again as amanuensis. It was by accident that I found out that a book is pretty sure to get tired, along about the middle, and refuse to go on with its work until its powers and its interest should should shall should have been refreshed by a rest and its depleted depleted depleted stock of raw materials reinforced by lapse of time. It was when I had reached the middle of “Tom Sawyer” that I made this invaluable find. At page 400 of my manuscript the story made a sudden and determined halt and refused to proceed another step. Day after day it still refused. I was disappointed, distressed, and immeasurably astonished, for I knew quite well that the tale was not finished, and I could not understand why I was not able to go on with it. The reason was very simple—my tank had run dry; it was empty; the stock of materials in it was exhausted; the story could not go on without materials; it could not be wrought out of nothing. When the manuscript had lain in a pigeon-hole pigeon-hole pigeon-hole two years I took it out, one day, and read the last chapter that I had written. It was then that I made the great discovery that when the tank runs dry you’ve only to leave it alone and it will fill up again, in time, while you are asleep—also also also while you are at work at other things, and are quite unaware that this unconscious and profitable cerebration cerebration labor cerebration is going on. There was plenty of material now, and the book went on and finished itself without any trouble. Ever [¶] Ever ¶ Ever since then, when I have been writing a book I have pigeon-holed it without misgivings when its tank ran dry, well well well knowing that it would fill up again without any of my help within the next two or three years, and that then the work of completing it would be simple and easy. “The Prince and the Pauper” struck work in the middle, because the tank was dry, and I did not touch it again for two years. A dry interval of two years occurred in “The Connecticut Yankee at the Court of King Arthur.” A like interval has occurred in the middle of other books of mine. Two similar intervals have occurred in a story of mine called “Which Was It?” In fact, the second interval has gone considerably over time, for it is now four years since that second one intruded itself. I am sure that the tank is full again now, and that I could take up that book and write the other half of it without a break or any lapse of interest—but I shan’t shan’t sha’n’t do it. The pen is irksome to me. I was born lazy, and dictating has spoiled me. I am quite sure I shall never touch a pen again; therefore that book will remain unfinished—a pity, too, for the idea of it is (actually) (actually) not in is (actually) new and would spring a handsome surprise upon the reader, at the end. There is another unfinished book, which I should probably entitle “The Refuge of the Derelicts.” It is half finished, and will remain so. There is still another one, entitled “The Adventures Adventures Adventure Adventures of a Microbe During Three Thousand Years— Years— Years, Years,— by a Microbe.” It is half finished and will remain so. There is yet another—“The Mysterious Stranger.” It is more than half finished. I would dearly like to finish it, and it causes me a real pang to reflect that it is not to be. These several tanks are full now, and those books would go gaily along and complete themselves if I would hold the pen, but I am tired of the pen. There was another of these half-finished stories. I carried it as far as thirty-eight thousand words four years ago, then destroyed it for fear I might some day finish it. Huck Finn Huck Finn “Huck Finn” was the teller of the story, and of course Tom Sawyer and Jim were the heroes of it. But I believed that that trio had done work enough in this world and were entitled to a permanent rest. In [¶] In ¶ In Rouen, in ’93, ’93, ’93, or ’94 ’93, I destroyed fifteen thousand dollars’ worth of manuscript, and in Paris, in the beginning of ’94, I destroyed ten thousand dollars’ worth—I mean, mean, mean, estimated as magazine stuff. I was afraid to keep those piles of manuscript on hand, lest I be tempted to sell them, for I was for I was while for I was fairly well persuaded that they were not up to standard. Ordinarily there would have been no temptation present, and I would not think of publishing doubtful stuff—but I was heavily in debt then, then, then, then and the temptation to mend my condition was so strong that I burnt the manuscripts to get rid of it. My wife not only made no objection, but encouraged me to do it, for she cared more for my reputation than for any other concern of ours. About that time she helped me put another temptation behind me. This was an offer of sixteen thousand dollars dollars dollars a year, for five years, to let my name be used as editor of a humorous periodical. I praise praise credit praise her for furnishing her help in resisting that temptation, temptation, temptation, for it is her due. There was no temptation about it, in fact, but she would have offered her help, just the same, if there had been one. I can conceive of many wild and extravagant things when my imagination is in good repair, but I can conceive of nothing quite so wild and extravagant as the idea of my accepting the editorship of a humorous periodical. I should regard that as the saddest (for me) (for me) not in (for me) of all occupations. If I should undertake it I should have to add to it the occupation of undertaker, to relieve it in some degree of its cheerlessness. I could edit a serious periodical with relish and a strong interest, but I have never cared enough about humor to qualify me to edit it or sit in judgment upon it. I could . . . upon it. not in I could edit a serious periodical with relish and a strong interest, but I have never cared enough about humor to qualify me to edit it or sit in judgment upon it. There are some books that refuse to be written. They stand their ground, year after year, and will not be persuaded. It isn’t because the book is not there and worth being written—it is only because the right form for the story does not present itself. There is only one right form for a story, and if you fail to find that form the story will not tell itself. You may try a dozen wrong forms, but in each case you will not get very far before you discover that you have not found the right one—then that story will always stop and decline to go any further. In the story of “Joan of Arc” I made six wrong starts, and each time that I offered the result the result them result to Mrs. Clemens she responded with the same deadly criticism—silence. She didn’t say say make a comment nor say a word, but her silence spoke with the voice of thunder. When at last I found the right form I recognized at once that it was the right one, and I knew what she would say. She said it, without doubt or hesitation. In the course of twelve years I made six attempts to tell a simple little story which I knew would tell itself in four hours if I could ever find the right starting-point. I scored six failures; then one day in London I offered the text of the story to Robert McClure, and proposed that he publish that text in the magazine and offer a prize to the person who should tell it best. I became greatly interested and went on talking upon the text for half an hour; then he said, “You have told the story yourself. You have nothing to do but put it on paper just as you have told it.” I recognized that this was true. At the end of four hours it was finished, and quite to my satisfaction. So it took twelve years and four hours to produce that little bit of a story, which I have called “The Death-Wafer Death-Wafer Deafth Wafer .” To start right is certainly an essential. I have proved this too many times to doubt it. Twenty-five or thirty years ago I began a story which was to turn upon the marvels of mental telegraphy. A man was to invent a scheme whereby he could synchronize two minds, minds, minds, typed correction minds, thousands of miles apart, apart, apart, typed correction apart, and enable them to freely converse together through the air without the aid of a wire. Four times I started it in the wrong way, and it wouldn’t go. Three times I discovered my mistake after writing about a hundred pages. I discovered it the fourth time when I had written four hundred pages—then I gave it up and put the whole thing in the fire. I I I * * * I have mentioned an unfinished book which might be entitled “The Refuge of the Derelicts.” In the manuscript the story has no title, but begins with a pretty brusque remark a pretty brusque remark a pretty brusque remark a pretty brusque remark ‘a pretty brusque remark’ underscored by an ancient admiral, who is Captain Ned Wakeman Wakeman Wakefield under a borrowed name. This reminds me of something. Four or five months ago, in the New York home, I learned by accident that we had been having a good deal of trouble with our telephones telephones telephones . The family get more or less peace and comfort out of concealing vexations from me on account of the infirmities of my temper, and it would be only by accident that I could find out that the telephones were making trouble. Upon inquiry I discovered that my tribe had been following the world’s usual custom—they had applied for relief to the Telephone Company’s subordinates. This is always a mistake. The only right way is to apply to the President of a corporation; your complaint receives immediate and courteous attention then. I called up the headquarters and asked the President to send some one to my house to listen to a complaint. One of the chief superintendents came—Mr. Scovel. The complaint occupied but a minute of our time. Then he sat by the bed and we smoked and chatted half an hour very pleasantly. I remarked that often and often I would dearly like to use the telephone myself, but didn’t dare to do it because when the connection was was is was imperfect I was was am was sure to lose my temper and swear—and while I would like to do that, that, that, and would get a good deal of satisfaction out of it, I couldn’t venture it it it, because I was aware that by telephone law the Company can remove your telephone if you indulge yourself in that way. Mr. Scovel Scovel Scoviel gladdened me by informing me that I could allow myself that indulgence without fear of injurious injurious the injurious results, for there wouldn’t be any, there being a clause in the law which allowed me that valuable privilege. Then he quoted that clause that clause that law that clause and made me happy. Two or three months ago I wanted that nameless manuscript heretofore mentioned, and I asked my secretary to call up my New York home on the long-distance and tell my daughter Clara to find that manuscript and send it to me. The line was not in good order, and Miss Lyon found great difficulty in making Clara understand what was wanted. After a deal of shouting back and forth Clara gathered that it was a manuscript that was wanted, and that she would find it among the manuscriptural riffraff in my study somewhere. Then she wanted to know by what sign she would recognize it. She asked for the title of it. Miss Lyon—using a volume of voice which should should cshould have carried to New York without the telephone’s help, said— “It has no title. It begins with a remark.” It took some time to make Clara understand that. Then she said, “What is the remark?” Miss Lyon shouted— “Tell him to go to hell.” Clara. “Tell him to go—where?” Miss Lyon. “To hell.” Clara. “I can’t get it. Spell it.” Miss Lyon. “H-E-L-L.” “H-E-L-L.” H-E-L-L.” Clara. “Oh, hell.” I was troubled, not by the ear-splitting shouting, which I didn’t mind, but by the character of the words that were going over that wire and being listened to in every office on it, and for a moment I was scared and said, “Now they’ll take our telephone out, on account of this kind of talk.” But the next moment I was comfortable again, because I remembered that blessed clause in the telephone law which Mr. Scovel had quoted to me, me, me, and which said: “In employing our telephones no subscriber shall be debarred from using his native language.”