12 February 1908 Dictated February February Feb. 12, 1908 Sample of foreign English discovered in New York—Mr. Clemens makes his fifth trip to Bermuda—His fad is collecting young girls. Apparently we do not need to go abroad to find quaint and delightful samples of foreign English. I doubt if the English of Continental hotel-advertisements hotel-advertisements hotel-advertisements or Continental English local guide-books, or even the showy and wonderful English of the college-bred Babu of Calcutta, can surpass in charm and naïveté naïveté naivete and felicity the following effort of a Hebrew tailor of our own city of New York. Mr. Paine came across it by accident, and gathered it in. It is a cheap and humble and rudely printed little circular: LADIES & GENTS!Why did you not take care for your garments?You pay high prices to make good fitting and fine shape You give them for pressing in any place which he don’t know about tailoring, he presses your coat the shoulders crooked streeches the collar and reverses, the pants with elbows and the sleeves with creases, the coat front jumps, he never brushes them and swells your goods to give the moths more chances to spoil your goods, I am sure, when an honest tailor will read it, he will say that I am right.Don’t trust your garments to the bell boys, they charge you high prices and carry them away to the cheap places, better send for an honest tailor, he will call and deliver them in good order.I guarantee for any work, at reasonable prices.also Ladies and Gents misfit garments mended to the best shape.You will be satisfied and hoping to be recommended to your friends,M. ROSENGARTEN.P R A C T I C A L T A I L O R,2 1 3 West 38 th Street,Near 7th Avenue, NEW YORK.REFERENCES:Abales, Devlin & Co.Brooks Bros. & Jos F. Webber. I have been to Bermuda again; this is the fifth time; it was on account of bronchitis, my annual visitor for these seventeen or eighteen years. I have not come out of any previous attack so quickly or so pleasantly; the attack has always kept me in bed five weeks, sometimes six, and once eight. This time I got out of bed at the end of the first week, two days after a ten-inch snow-storm, and took the chances and went to sea in bitter winter weather. We made the passage in forty-five hours and landed in lovely summer weather. The passage itself came near to curing me, for a radical change is a good doctor. A single day single day couple of single days of constant and delightful exposure to the Bermudian sun completed the cure; then I stayed eight eight seven eight days longer to enjoy the spiritual serenities and the bodily rejuvenations rejuvenations rejuvinations furnished by that happy little paradise. It grieves me, and I feel reproached, that I allowed the physicians to send Mrs. Clemens on a horrible ten-day sea journey to Italy when Bermuda was right here at hand and worth a hundred Italies, for her needs. They said she must have a warm and soft and gentle climate, and that nothing else could help her. The winter climate of Florence distinctly failed to meet the requirements; we had eight months of uncomfortable weather, with much chilliness, two months of rain, and very infrequent splashes of sunshine. She was not able to outlive these disasters, and she was never able to flee from them, for lack of strength. It astonishes me and grieves me to remember that when Italy was proposed Bermuda never once occurred to me; yet I knew Florence well, and I knew Bermuda well, and was aware that for climate Florence was a sarcasm as compared with Bermuda. I suppose we are all collectors, and I suppose each each that each of us thinks that his fad is a more rational one than any of the others. Pierpont Morgan collects rare and precious works of art and pays millions per year for them; an old friend of mine, a Roman prince, collects and stores up in his palace in Rome every kind of strange and odd thing he can find in the several continents and archipelagoes archipelagoes archipelagos , and as a side issue—a pastime, and unimportant—has collected four hundred thousand dollars’ worth of postage-stamps. Other collectors collect rare books, at war prices, which they don’t read, and which they wouldn’t value if a page were lacking. Still other collectors collect menus; still others collect playbills playbills play-bills ; still others collect ancient andirons. As for me, I collect pets: pets: pets: young girls—girls from ten to sixteen years old; girls who are pretty and sweet and naïve naïve naive and innocent—dear young creatures to whom life is a perfect joy and to whom it has brought no wounds, no bitterness, and few tears. My collection consists of gems of the first water.