7 February 1906 February title February Feb. 7, 1906 Susy Susy Susyie Susy Clemens’s Biography Biography biography of her father—Mr. Clemens’s opinion of critics, etc. When Susy Susy Susyie Susy was thirteen, and was a slender little maid with plaited plaited platted platited plaited tails of copper-tinged brown hair down her back, and was perhaps the busiest bee in the household hive, by reason of the manifold studies, health exercises and recreations she had to attend to, she secretly, and of her own motion, and out of love, added another task to her labors—the writing of a biography of me. She did this work in her bedroom bedroom bed-room bedroom at night, and kept her record hidden. After a little, little, little, little, the mother discovered it and filched it, and let me see it; then told Susy Susy Susyie Susy what she had done, and how pleased I was, and how proud. I remember that time with a deep pleasure. I had had compliments before, but none that touched me like this; none that could approach it for value in my eyes. It has kept that place always since. I have had no compliment, no praise, no tribute from any source, that was so precious to me as this one was and still is. As I read it now, after all these many years, it is still a king’s message to me, and brings me the same dear surprise it brought me then—with the pathos added, added, added added, added, of the thought that the eager and hasty hand that sketched it and scrawled it it it, it, it will not touch mine again—and I feel as the humble and unexpectant must feel when their eyes fall upon the edict that raises them to the ranks of the noble. Yesterday while I was rummaging in a pile of ancient note-books of mine which I had not seen for years, I came across a reference to that biography. It is quite evident that several times, at breakfast and dinner, in those long past long past long-past days, I was posing for the biography. In fact, I clearly remember that I was doing that—and I also remember that Susy Susy Susyie Susy detected it. I remember saying a very smart thing, with a good deal of an air, at the breakfast table breakfast table breakfast table breakfast-table one morning, and that Susy Susy Susyie Susy observed to her mother privately, a little later, that papa was doing that for the biography. I cannot bring myself to change any line or word in Susy’s Susy’s Susyie’s Susy’s sketch of me, but will introduce passages from it now and then passages from it now and then it here passages from it now and then passages from it now and then just as they they it they they came in their their its their their quaint simplicity out of her honest heart, which was the beautiful heart of a child. What comes from that source has a charm and grace of its own which may transgress all the recognized laws of literature, if it choose, and yet be literature still, and worthy of hospitality. I shall print the whole of this little biography, before I am done with it—every word, every sentence. I shall . . . sentence. not in I shall . . . sentence. I shall . . . sentence. The spelling is frequently desperate, but it was Susy’s Susy’s Susyie’s Susy’s , and it shall stand. I love it, and cannot profane it. To me, it is gold. To correct it would alloy it, not refine it. It would spoil it. It would take from it its freedom and flexibility and make it stiff and formal. Even when it is most extravagant I am not shocked. It is Susy’s Susy’s Susyie’s Susy’s spelling, and she was doing the best she could—and nothing could better it for me. me. me. me. . . . She learned languages easily; she learned history easily; she learned music easily; she learned all things easily, quickly, and thoroughly—except spelling. She even learned that, after a while. But it would have grieved me but little if she had failed in it—for although good spelling was my one accomplishment I was never able to greatly respect it. When I was a schoolboy schoolboy school-boy , sixty years ago, we had two prizes in our school. One was for good spelling, the other for amiability. These things were thin, smooth, silver silver slender silver silver disks, about the size of a dollar. Upon the one was engraved in flowing Italian script the words “Good Spelling Spelling sSpelling Spelling ,” on the other was engraved the word “Amiability.” The holders of these prizes hung them about the neck with a string—and those holders were the envy of the whole school. There wasn’t a pupil that wouldn’t have given a leg for the privilege of wearing one of them a week, but no pupil ever got a chance except John Robards and me. John Robards was eternally and indestructibly amiable. I may even say devilishly amiable; fiendishly amiable; exasperatingly amiable. That was the sort of feeling that we had about that quality of his. So he always wore the amiability medal. I always wore the other medal. That word “always” is a trifle too strong. We lost the medals several times. It was because they became so monotonous. We needed a change—therefore several times we traded medals. It was a satisfaction to John Robards to seem to be a good speller—which he wasn’t. And it was a satisfaction to me to seem to be amiable, amiable, amiable, amiable, for a change. But of course these changes could not long endure—for some schoolmate schoolmate school-mate or other would presently notice what had been happening, and that schoolmate schoolmate school-mate would not have been human if he had lost any time in reporting this treason. The teacher took the medals away from us at once, of course—and we always had them back again before Friday night. If we lost the medals Monday morning, John’s amiability was at the top of the list Friday afternoon when the teacher came to square up the week’s account. The Friday afternoon session always closed with “spelling down.” Being in disgrace, I necessarily started at the foot of my division of spellers, but I always slaughtered both divisions and stood alone with the medal around my neck when the campaign was finished. I did miss on a word once, just at the end of one of these conflicts, and so lost the medal. I left the first r r r ‘r’ underscored r out of February—but that was to accommodate a sweetheart. My passion was so strong just at that time that I would have left out the whole alphabet if the word had contained it. As I have said before, I never had any large respect for good spelling. That is my feeling yet. Before the spelling book spelling book spelling-book came with its arbitrary forms, men unconsciously revealed shades of their characters, and also added enlightening shades of expression to what they wrote by their spelling, and so it is possible that the spelling book spelling book spelling-book has been a doubtful benevolence to us. Susy began the biography in 1885, 1885 1885 (1885) typed in the margin (1885) typed in the margin, deleted by Harvey not in when I was in the fiftieth year of my age. age. age. age., and she in the fourteenth of hers. age, and she in just entering the fourteenth of hers. Hobby typed Harvey’s revision but queried it; SLC canceled her query and altered the revision age, and she just entering the fourteenth of hers. She begins in this way: We are a very happy family. We consist of Papa, Mamma, Jean, Clara and me. It is papa I am writing about, and I shall have no trouble in not knowing what to say about him, as he is a very striking character. We are . . . character. “We are . . . character.” “We are . . . character.” We are . . . character. But wait a minute—I will return to Susy presently. In ¶ But . . . presently. ¶ In ¶ But . . . presently. no ¶ In ¶ But . . . presently. no ¶ In ¶ But . . . presently. ¶ In the matter of slavish imitation, man is the monkey’s superior all the time. The average man is destitute of independence of opinion. He is not interested in contriving an opinion of his own, by study and reflection, but is only anxious to find out what his neighbor’s opinion is and slavishly adopt it. A generation ago, I found out that the latest review of a book was pretty sure to be just a reflection of the earliest review of it; that it; that it. That it;. Tthat period mended to a semicolon it; that whatever the first reviewer found to praise or censure in the book would be repeated in the latest reviewer’s report, with nothing fresh added. Therefore more than once I took the precaution of sending my book, book, book, book, ◇◇ , in manuscript, to Mr. Howells, when he was editor of the Atlantic Monthly, Atlantic Monthly, Atlantic Monthly, “Atlantic Monthly,” underscore of ‘Atlantic Monthly,’ canceled and quotation marks inserted “Atlantic Monthly,” so that he could prepare a review of it at leisure. I knew he would say the truth about the book—I also knew that he would find more merit than demerit in it, because I already knew that that was the condition of the book. I allowed no copy of it it that book that book it it to go out to the press until after Mr. Howells’s Howells’s Howells’s Howells’s notice of it had appeared. That book was always safe. There wasn’t a man behind a pen in all America that had the courage to find anything in the book which Mr. Howells had not found—there wasn’t a man behind a pen in America that had spirit enough to say a brave and original thing about the book on his own responsibility. I believe that the trade of critic, in literature, music, and the drama, is the most degraded of all trades, and that it has no real value—certainly no large value. When Charles Dudley Warner and I were about to bring out “The Gilded Age,” the editor of the Daily Graphic Daily Graphic Daily Graphic “Daily Graphic” originally ‘Daily Graphic’; underscore canceled “Daily Graphic” persuaded me to let him have an advance copy, he giving me his word of honor that no notice of it would would should shwould would appear in his paper until after the Atlantic Monthly Atlantic Monthly Atlantic Monthly “Atlantic Monthly” underscore of ‘Atlantic Monthly’ canceled and quotation marks inserted “Atlantic Monthly” notice should have appeared. This reptile published a review of the book within three days afterward. I could not really complain, because he had only given me his word of honor as security; honor as security; honor, as security. honor, as security.; comma mended to a semicolon honor as security; I ought to have required of him something substantial. I believe his notice did not deal mainly with the merit of the book, or the lack of it, but with my moral attitude toward the public. It was charged that I had used my reputation to play a swindle upon the public; public; public— public—; public; that Mr. Warner had written as much as half of the book, and that I had used my name to float it and give it currency; a currency—so the critic averred— currency; a currency—so the critic averred— currency—a currency currency—; a currency—so the critic averred— currency; a currency—so the critic averred— which it could not have acquired without my name, name, name— name—, name, and that this conduct of mine was a grave fraud upon the people. The Graphic Graphic Graphic “Graphic” underscore of ‘Graphic’ canceled and quotation marks inserted “Graphic” was not an authority upon any subject whatever. It had a sort of distinction, distinction, distinction distinction, distinction, in that it was the first and only illustrated daily newspaper that the world had seen; but it was without character; it was poorly and cheaply edited; its opinion of a book or of any other work of art was of no consequence. Everybody knew this, yet all the critics in America, one after the other, copied the Graphic’s Graphic’s Graphic’s “Graphic’s”; underscore of ‘Graphic’s’ canceled and quotation marks inserted “Graphic’s” criticism, merely changing the phraseology, and left me under that charge of dishonest conduct. Even the great Chicago Tribune, Tribune, Tribune, “Tribune,” underscore of ‘Tribune,’ canceled and quotation marks inserted “Tribune,” the most important journal in the Middle West Middle West Middle-West Middle-West Middle West , was not able to invent invent strike out invent invent anything fresh, but adopted the view of the humble Daily Graphic, Daily Graphic, daily Graphic, “dDaily Graphic,” underscore of ‘Graphic,’ canceled and quotation marks inserted “Daily Graphic,” dishonesty-charge dishonesty-charge dishonesty-charge dishonesty-charge and all. However ¶ However no ¶ However ¶ However ¶ However , let it go. It is the will of God that we must have critics, and missionaries, and Congressmen Congressmen congressmen Congressmen , and humorists, and humorists, and humorists, and humorists, and we must bear the burden. Meantime, I seem to have been drifting into criticism myself. But that is nothing. At the worst, criticism is nothing more than a crime, and I am not unused to that. What I have been traveling traveling traveling travelling toward all this time is this: this: this: I had been before the public for twenty-five years, and this: the first critic that ever had occasion to describe my personal appearance littered littered had littered littered his description with foolish and inexcusable errors whose aggregate furnished the result that I was distinctly and distressingly unhandsome. That description floated around the country in the papers, and was in was in it had been in was in was in constant use and wear for a quarter of a century. It seems strange to me that apparently apparently apparently apparently no critic in the country could could could apparently could be found who could look at me and have the courage to take up his pen and destroy that lie. That lie began its course on the Pacific coast, in 1864, 1864 1864 (1864) typed in the margin, deleted by Harvey (1864) typed in the margin not in and it likened me in personal appearance to Petroleum V. Nasby, who had been out there lecturing. For twenty-five years afterward, no critic could furnish a description of me without fetching in Nasby to help out my portrait. I knew Nasby well, and he was a good fellow, but in my life I have not felt malignant malignant malignantly malignantly malignant enough about any more than three persons to charge those persons with resembling Nasby. It hurts me to the heart, these things. To this day, it hurts me to the heart. It hurts me to the heart, . . . the heart. It hurts me to the heart, . . . the heart. It hurts me to the heart. I was was was was originally ‘was’; underscore canceled was always handsome. Anybody but a critic could have seen it. And it had long long long not in been a distress to my family—including Susy Susy Susyie Susy —that the critics should go on making this wearisome mistake, year after year, when there was no foundation foundation occasion foundation foundation for it. Even when a critic wanted to be particularly friendly and complimentary to me, he didn#x2019;t dare to go beyond my clothes. He never ventured beyond that old safe frontier never ventured beyond that old safe frontier did not venture beyond that frontier did not never ventured beyond that old safe frontier written in the margin: ‘Private: Discard the stupid Harper rule, for once: don’t put a comma after “old”—I can’t have it! SLC’ never ventured beyond that old safe frontier . When he had finished with my clothes clothes clothes clothes, he had said all the kind things, the pleasant things, the complimentary things he could risk. Then he dropped back on Nasby. Yesterday I found this clipping in the pocket of one of those ancient memorandum-books of mine. It is of the date of thirty-nine years ago, and both the paper and the ink are yellow with the bitterness that I felt in that old day when I clipped it out to preserve it and brood over it, and grieve about it. I will copy it here, to wit: A A “A “A A correspondent of the Philadelphia Press, Press, Press, “Press,” originally ‘Press,’; underscore canceled “Press,” writing of one of Schuyler Colfax’s receptions, says of our Washington correspondent: “Mark “Mark ‘Mark “Mark single quotation mark mended to double “Mark Twain, the delicate humorist, humorist, humorist humorist, humorist, was present; quite a lion, as he deserves to be. Mark is a bachelor, faultless in taste, whose snowy vest is suggestive of endless quarrels with Washington washerwomen; but the heroism of Mark is settled for all time, for such purity and smoothness were never seen before. His lavender gloves might have been stolen from some Turkish harem, so delicate were they in size; but more likely—anything else were more likely than that. In form and feature he bears some resemblance to the immortal Nasby; but whilst Petroleum is brunette to the core, Twain is golden, amber-hued, melting, blonde.” blonde.” blonde.’ ” blonde.’ ”” original double quotation mark canceled and remaining single quotation mark mended to double blonde.” Let us return to Susy’s Susy’s Susyie’s Susy’s Biography Biography biography now, and get the opinion of one who is unbiassed. unbiassed. unbiassed. unbiassed unbiassed: From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. not in From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. Papa’s Papa’s “Papa’s “Papa’s Papa’s appearance has been described many times, but very incorrectly. He has beautiful gray hair, not any too thick or any too long, but just right; a Roman nose, which greatly improves the beauty of his features; kind blue eyes and a small mustache. He has a wonderfully shaped head and profile. He has a very good figure—in short, he is an extrodinarily fine looking man. All his features are perfect, exept exept exept except that he hasn’t extrodinary teeth. His complexion is very fair, and he doesn’t ware a beard. He is a very good man and a very funny one. He has got a temper, but we all of us have in this family. He is the loveliest man I ever saw or ever hope to see—and oh, so absent-minded. He does tell perfectly delightful stories. Clara and I used to sit on each arm of his chair and listen while he told us stories about the pictures on the wall. wall. wall.” wall.” wall. I remember the story-telling days vividly. They were a difficult and exacting audience—those little creatures.