1 June 1906 Friday Friday Thursday Friday Friday , June 1, 1906 General General Gen. Grant wishes Mr. Clemens’s opinion of the literary quality of his Memoirs—Mr. Clemens places them side by side with Caesar’s “Commentaries”—Depew’s best speech—Buckner’s visit to General General Gen. Grant—General Grant’s death—Success of the Memoirs, and Webster’s enlarged head Success of the Memoirs, and Webster’s enlarged head Success of the Memoirs, and Webster’s enlarged head not in —Webster suspects his bookkeeper, Scott. Whenever galley-proofs galley-proofs galley proofs or revises went to General Grant, a set came also to me. General Grant was aware of this. Sometimes I referred to the proofs casually, but entered into no particulars concerning them. By and by I learned, through a member of the household, that he was disturbed and disappointed because I had never expressed an opinion as to the literary quality of the Memoirs. It was also suggested that a word of encouragement from me would be a help to him. I was as much surprised as Columbus’s cook could have been to learn that Columbus wanted his opinion as to how Columbus was doing his navigating. It could not have occurred to me that General Grant could have any use for anybody’s assistance or encouragement in any work which he might undertake to do. He was the most modest of men, and this was another instance of it. He was venturing upon a new trade, an uncharted sea, and stood in need of the encouraging word, just like any creature of common clay. It was a great compliment that he should care for my opinion, and should desire it, and I took the earliest opportunity to diplomatically turn the conversation in that direction and furnish it without seeming to lug it in by the ears. By chance, I had been comparing the Memoirs with Caesar’s “Commentaries” and was qualified to deliver judgment. I was able to say, in all sincerity, that the same high merits distinguished both books—clarity of statement, directness, simplicity, unpretentiousness, manifest truthfulness, fairness and justice toward friend and foe alike, soldierly candor and frankness, and soldierly avoidance of flowery speech. I placed the two books side by side upon the same high level, and I still think that they belonged there. I learned afterward that General Grant was pleased with this verdict. It shows that he was just a man, just a human being, just an author. An author values a compliment even when it comes from a source of doubtful competency. This reminds me of the most telling speech I ever listened to—the best speech ever made by the capable Depew, and the shortest. Although General Grant was a vivacious and interesting talker when none were present but familiar friends, it was his habit to keep his jaws locked when strangers were about. It was difficult to get him to venture even half a dozen words on a public occasion. He would keep his seat, when called upon to speak, and would leave the toast-master to make his excuses for him. That fine speech of Depew’s was made at a banquet in honor of General Grant. Depew always came late to banquets, in those early days, and this time he arrived just as the chairman was finishing an impassioned eulogy of the guest of the occasion. Depew came striding up the centre centre center of the house, and just as he reached the middle the chairman sat down, in the midst of the usual cyclone of cries for “Grant, Grant, General Grant!” Grant!” Grant.!” period mended to an exclamation point Grant!” General Grant said “There’s Depew. Let him respond for me.” Depew stopped where he was, and without pause or hesitation said, with fine impressiveness, in substance, this: “Respond this: [¶] “Respond this: [¶] “Respond this: [¶] “Respond for him him him ‘him’ underscored him ? It is not necessary. No felicity of words can so eloquently speak as can the silence and the visible person of a man whose name will still be familiar upon the lips of men when twenty centuries shall have come and gone.” That was the substance of what he said, not the words. The language was finished, perfect, moving, flawless. Depew was the prince of after-dinner orators during thirty years. He made some hundreds of happy and distinguished speeches, but I think his briefest one was his best. He is dying now, and under a cloud—a pity, too, that such should be his fate after so long a career of great and uninterrupted popularity. General Grant wrought heroically with his pen while his disease made its steady inroads upon his life, and at last his work stood completed. He was moved to Mount McGregor, and there his strength passed gradually away. Toward the last, he was not able to speak, but used a pencil and small slips of paper when he needed to say anything. I went there to see him once, toward the end, and he asked me with his pencil, and evidently with anxious solicitude, if there was a prospect that his book would make something for his family. I said that the canvass for it was progressing vigorously, that the subscriptions and the money and the money and the money and the money were coming in fast, that the campaign was not more than half completed yet—but that if it should stop where it was there would be two hundred thousand dollars coming to his family. He expressed his gratification, with his pencil. When I was entering the house, the Confederate General General general , Buckner, was leaving it. 1840 1840 (1840) Buckner and Grant Grant the General Grant Grant had been fellow cadets at West Point, about 1840. I think they had served together in the Mexican war, a little later. After that war Grant (then a Captain Captain captain in the regular army) was ordered to a military post in Oregon. By and by he resigned and came East and found himself in New York penniless. On the street he met Buckner, and borrowed fifty dollars of him. 1862 1862 (1862) In February 1862 Buckner was in command of the Confederate garrison of Fort Donelson. General Grant captured the fortress, by assault, and took fifteen thousand prisoners. After that, that, that, that, the two soldiers did not meet again until that day at Mount McGregor, twenty-three years later. Several visitors were present, and there was a good deal of chaffing and joking, some of it at Buckner’s expense. Finally General Buckner said, “I said, [¶] “I said, ¶“I said, [¶] “I have my full share of admiration and esteem for Grant. It dates back to our cadet days. He has as many merits and virtues as any man I am acquainted with, but he has one deadly defect. He is an incurable borrower, and when he wants to borrow he knows of only one limit—he wants what you’ve got. When I was poor he borrowed fifty dollars of me; when I was rich he borrowed fifteen thousand men.” men.” million. men.” men.” General Grant died at Mount McGregor on the 23d 23d 23rd of July. In September or October the Memoirs went to press. Several sets of plates were made; the printing was distributed among several great printing establishments; a great number of steam presses were kept running night and day on the book; several large binderies were kept at work binding it. The book was in sets of two volumes—large octavo. Its price was nine dollars in cloth. For costlier bindings the price was proportionately higher. Two thousand sets in tree-calf were issued at twenty-five dollars per set. The book was issued on the 10th of December, and I turned out to be a competent prophet. In the beginning I had told General Grant that his book would sell six hundred thousand single volumes, and that is what happened. It sold three hundred thousand sets. The first check that went to Mrs. Grant was for two hundred thousand dollars; the next one, a few months later, was for a a one a a hundred and fifty thousand. I do not remember about the subsequent checks, but I think that in the aggregate the book paid Mrs. Grant something like half a million dollars. Webster was in his glory. In his obscure days his hat was No. 6¼; in 6¼; in 6¼; . I in period mended to a semicolon; ‘I’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ 6¼; in these latter days he was not able to get his head into a barrel. He loved to descant upon the wonders of the book. He liked to go into the statistics. He liked to tell that it took thirteen miles of gold leaf to print the gilt titles on the book backs; he liked to tell how many thousand tons the three hundred thousand sets weighed. Of course that same old natural thing happened: happened: happened.: period mended to a colon happened: Webster thought it was he that sold the book. He thought that General Grant’s great name helped, but he regarded himself as the main reason of the book’s prodigious success. This shows that Webster was merely human, and merely a publisher. All publishers are Columbuses. The successful author is their America. The reflection that they—like Columbus— —like Columbus— —like Columbus— —like Columbus— didn’t discover what they expected to discover, and didn’t discover what they started out to discover, doesn’t trouble them. All they remember is that they discovered America; they America; they America;. Tthey period mended to a semicolon America; they forget that they started out to discover some patch or corner of India. A Mr. Scott was Webster’s bookkeeper. Back in the summer, when the subscription money had begun to pour in in a great and steady stream of bank-bills, sent by express, Webster told me he was suspicious of Scott and was going to lay a trap for him. He was going to pass some marked bank notes bank notes bank-notes through his hands and see if they would stick.