Grant and the Chinese Grant and the Chinese 1884. Grant and the Chinese 1884. flush left 1884. centered on the same line Grant and the Chinese. Early in this year year year, or late in 1883, if my memory serves me, I called on General Grant with Yung Yung Young Wing, Wing, Wing late Chinese Minister at Washington, to introduce Wing and let him lay before General Grant a proposition. Li-Hung-Chang, one of the greatest and most progressive men in China since the death of Prince Kung, had been trying to persuade the Imperial government to build a system of military railroads in China, and had so far succeeded in his persuasions that a majority of the government were willing to consider the matter matter matter— —provided that money could be obtained for that purpose, outside of China—this money to be raised upon the customs of the country and by bonding the railway or some such way. Yung Yung Young Wing believed that if General Grant would take charge of the matter here here here, and create the syndicate syndicate syndicate, the money would be easily forthcoming. He also knew that General Grant was better and more favorably known in China than any other foreigner in the world and was aware that if his name were associated with the enterprise—the syndicate—it would inspire the Chinese government and people and give them the greatest possible sense of security. We found the General General Gen. cooped up in his room with a severe rheumatism rheumatism rheumatism, resulting from a fall on the ice, which he had got some months before. He would not undertake a syndicate, because times were so hard hard hard, here here here, that people would be loath loath loathe to invest money so so in so far away. Of course Yung Yung Young Wing’s Wing’s Wing’s proposal included a liberal compensation for General Grant for his trouble, but that was a thing that the General would not listen to for a moment. He moment. He moment.— He said that easier times would come by and bye, bye, bye, and that the money could could c’d then be raised, no doubt, raised, no doubt, raised, no doubt, and that he would enter into it cheerfully and with zeal and carry it through to the very best of his ability, ability, ability, but he must do it without compensation. In no case would he consent to take any money for it. Here Here Here, again again again, he manifested the very strongest interest interest interest in China, an interest which I had had have had seen him evince on previous occasions. He said he had urged a system of railways on Li-Hung-Chang when he was in China China China, and he now felt so sure that such a system would be a great salvation for the country country country, and also the beginning of the country’s liberation from the Tartar rule and thraldom thraldom thraldom, that he would be quite willing at a favorable time to do everything he could toward carrying out that project project project.: period mended to a colon without other compensation than the pleasure he would derive from being useful to China. This reminds me of one other circumstance. About 1879 or 1880, the Chinese pupils in Hartford Hartford Hartford, and other New England towns towns towns, had been ordered home by the Chinese government. There government. There government.— There were two parties in the Chinese government: one headed by Li-Hung-Chang, the progressive party, which was striving to introduce Western arts and education into China, China, China, and the other was opposed to all progressive measures. Li-Hung-Chang and the progressive party kept the upper hand for some time time time, and and and, during this period period period, the government had sent one hundred or more hundred or more hundred, or more, of the country’s choicest youth over here to be educated. But now But now But, now, the other party had got the upper upper other upper hand and had ordered these young people home. At this time an old Chinaman named Wong Wong Quaong , non-progressionist, was the chief China Minister at Washington and Yung Yung Young Wing was his assistant. The order disbanding the schools was a great blow to Yung Yung Young Wing, who had spent many years in working for their establishment. This order came upon him with the suddenness of a thunder clap. He did not know which way to turn. First, he got a petition signed signed sent signed by the Presidents of various various the various American colleges setting forth the great progress that the Chinese pupils had made and offering arguments to show why the pupils should be allowed to remain to finish their education. This paper was to be conveyed to the Chinese government through the Minister at Pekin. But Yung Yung Young Wing felt the need of a more powerful voice in the matter and General Grant occurred to him. He thought that if he could get General General Gen. Grant’s great name added to that petition that that alone would outweigh the signatures signatures signitures of a thousand college professors. So the Rev. Mr. Twichell Mr. Twichell Mr Twitchell and I went down to New York to see the General. I introduced Mr. Twichell, Twichell, Twitchell, who had come with a careful speech for the occasion occasion occasion, in which he intended to load the General with information concerning the Chinese pupils and the Chinese question generally. But he never got the chance to deliver it. The General took the word out of his mouth and talked straight ahead and and and easily revealed to Twichell Twichell Twitchell the fact that the General was master of the whole matter and needed no information from anybody anybody any body, and also the fact that he was brimful of interest in the matter. Now as always Now as always Now, as always, the General was not only ready to do what we asked of him but a hundred times more. He said yes, he would sign that paper if desired, paper if desired, paper, if desired, but he would do better than that: he would write a personal letter to Li-Hung-Chang Li-Hung-Chang Li-Hung-Chuang and do it immediately. So Twichell Twichell Twitchell and I went down stairs into the lobby of the Fifth Fifth 5th Avenue Hotel, a crowd of waiting and anxious visitors sitting in the anteroom, anteroom, anteroom, and and and, in the course of half an hour hour hour, he sent for us again again again, and put into our hands his letter to Li-Hung-Chang Li-Hung-Chang Li-Hung-Chuang., to be sent directly and without the intervention of the American Minister Minister Minister, or any one else. It was a clear, compact compact compact, and admirably written statement of the case of the Chinese pupils pupils pupils, with some equally clear arguments to show that the breaking up of the schools would be a mistake. We shipped the letter and prepared to wait a couple of months to see what the result would be. But we had not to wait so long. The moment the General’s letter reached China a telegram came back from the Chinese government government government, which was almost a copy copy copy, in detail detail detail, of General Grant’s letter and the the the. . . cablegram ended with the peremptory command to old Minister Wong Wong Wuong to to to. . continue the Chinese schools. It was a marvelous marvelous marvellous exhibition of the influence of a private citizen of one country over the counsels of an empire situated on the other side of the globe. Such an influence could have been wielded by no other citizen in the world outside of that empire—in fact the policy policy palace policy of the Imperial government had been reversed reversed removed reversed from room 45, 45, 45 Fifth Avenue Hotel, New York, York, York by a private citizen of the United United United. . . . States.