17 January 1906 Wednesday, January 17, 1906 January 16th, continued. title Wednesday, January 17, 1906 January 16th, continued. Jan. 16th, continued. (Dictated Wednesday, Jan. 17th.) January 16th, continued. (Dictated Wednesday, Jan. 17). About General Sickles. About General Sickles. (About General Sickles). typed above the dateline but marked to be moved below it About General Sickles. deleted in blue pencil With considerable frequency, since then, I have tried to get publishers to make the experiment of such a magazine, but I was never successful. I was never able to convince a publisher publisher publsher publisher that The Back Number The Back Number “The Back Number” would interest the public. Not one of them was able to conceive of the idea of a sane human being finding interest in stale things. I made my latest effort three years ago. Again I failed to convince. But I, myself, am not convinced. I am quite sure that The Back Number The Back Number “The Back Number” would succeed and become a favorite. I am also sure of another thing—that The Back Number The Back Number “The Back Number” would have this advantage over any other magazine that was ever issued, to wit: that the man who read the first paragraph in it would go on and read the magazine entirely through, skipping nothing—whereas there is no magazine in existence which ever contains three articles which can be depended upon to interest the reader. It is necessary to put a dozen dozen dozen dozen ‘dozen’ underscored articles into a magazine of the day in order to hit six or eight tastes. One man buys the magazine for one of its articles, another is attracted by another, another, another, of its articles, another, another by a third; but no man buys the magazine because of the whole of its contents. I contend that The Back Number The Back Number “The Back Number” would be bought for the whole of its contents, and that each reader would read the whole. whole. whole. of those contents. whole. “Mr. Paine, you and I will start that magazine, and try the experiment, if you are willing to select the ancient news from old books and newspapers, and do the rest of the editorial work. Are you willing?” Mr. Paine. “I should be very willing, when we get so that we can undertake it.” “Very well, then we will, by and by, make that experiment.” Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell and I stepped across the street, that night, in the rain, and spent an hour with General Sickles. Sickles is eighty-one years old, now. I had met him only once or twice before, although there has been only the width of 9th street street Street between us for a year. He is too old to make visits, and I am too lazy. I remember when he killed Philip Philip Phillip Barton Key, son of the author of “The Star-Spangled Banner,” and I remember the prodigious excitement it made in the country. I think it cannot be far from fifty years ago. My vague recollection of it is that it happened in Washington, and that I was there at the time. I have felt well acquainted with General General Gen. Sickles for thirty-eight or thirty-nine years, because I have known Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell that long. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell was a chaplain in Sickles’s brigade in the Civil War, and he was always fond of talking about the General. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell was under Sickles all through the war. Whenever he comes down from Hartford he makes it his duty to go and pay his respects to the General. Sickles is a genial old fellow fellow fellow follow ; a handsome and stately and stately and stately and stately military figure; talks smoothly, smoothly, smoothly, smoothly, in well-constructed English—I may say perfectly constructed English. His talk is full of interest and bristling with points, but as there are no emphases scattered through it anywhere, and as there is no animation in it, it soon becomes oppressive by its monotony, and it makes the listener drowsy. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell had to step on my foot once or twice. The late Bill Nye once said “I have been told told told underscore of ‘told’ canceled told that Wagner’s music is better than it sounds.” That felicitous description of a something which so many people have tried to describe, and couldn’t, does seem to fit the General’s manner of speech exactly. His talk is much better than it is. No, that is not the idea—there seems to be a lack there somewhere. Maybe it is another case of the sort just quoted. Maybe Nye would say that “it it Iit it is better than it sounds.” I think that is it. His talk does not sound entertaining, but it is distinctly entertaining. Sickles lost a leg at Gettysburg, and I remember Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s account of that circumstance. He talked about it on one of our long walks, a great many years ago, and although the details have passed out of my memory, I still carry the picture in my mind as presented by Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell . The leg was carried off by a cannon ball cannon ball cannon-ball . Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell , and others, carried the General out of the battle, and they placed him on a bed made of boughs, boughs, boughs, I should say, boughs, under a tree. There was no surgeon present, and Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell and Rev. Father O’Hagan O’Hagan O’Hagean O’Hagan , a Catholic priest, made a make-shift tourniquet and stopped the gush of blood—checked checked checked checked ‘checked’ underscored it, perhaps is the right term. A newspaper correspondent appeared first. General General Gen. Sickles considered himself considered himself supposed that he was considered himself considered himself a dying man, and (if Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell is as truthful a person as the character of his cloth requires him to be) General Sickles put aside everything connected with a future world in order to go out of this one in becoming style. And so he dictated his “last words” “last words” “last words” “last words” to that newspaper correspondent. That was Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s idea—I remember it well—that the General, no doubt influenced by the fact that several people’s last words have been so badly chosen—whether by accident or intention—that they have outlived all the rest of the man’s fame, was moved to do his last words in a form calculated to petrify and preserve them for the future generations. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell quoted that speech. I have forgotten what it was, now, but it was well chosen for its purpose. Now when we sat there in the General’s presence listening to his monotonous talk—it was about himself, and is always about himself, and always seems modest and unexasperating, inoffensive,—it seemed to me that he was just the kind of man who would risk his salvation in order to do some “last words” in an attractive way. He murmured and warbled, and warbled, and it was all just as simple and pretty as it could be. And also I will say this: that he never made an ungenerous remark about anybody. He spoke severely of this and that and the other person—officers in the war—but he spoke with dignity and with courtesy. There was no malignity in what he said. He merely pronounced what he evidently regarded as just criticisms upon them. I ¶ I ¶ I ¶ I noticed then, what I had noticed once before, four or five months ago, that the General valued his lost leg away above the one that is left. I am perfectly sure that if he had to part with either of them he would part with the one that he has got. I have noticed this same thing in several other Generals Generals generals who had lost a portion of themselves in the Civil War. There was General Fairchild, of Wisconsin. He lost an arm in one of the great battles. When he was Consul General Consul General Consul-General in Paris and we Clemenses were sojourning there some time or other, and grew to be well acquainted with him and with his family, I know that whenever a proper occasion—an occasion which gave General Fairchild an opportunity to elevate elevate expose elevate elevate the stump of the lost arm and wag it with effect—occurred, effect—occurred, effect,—occurred, typed insertion with a handwritten caret effect—occurred, that is what he did. It was easy to forgive him for it, and I did it. General Noyes was our Minister to France at the time. He had lost a leg in the war. He was a pretty vain man, I will say that for him, and anybody could see—certainly I saw—that whenever there was a proper gathering around, Noyes Noyes why Noyes Noyes presently seemed to disappear. There wasn’t anything left of him but but except but but the leg which he didn’t have. Well, General Sickles sat there on the sofa and talked. It was a curious place. Two rooms of considerable size—parlors opening together with folding-doors—and the floors, the walls, the ceilings, cluttered up and overlaid with lion skins, tiger skins, leopard skins, elephant elephant elephant’s skins; photographs of the General at various times of life—photographs en civil; en civil; en civil; en civil; photographs in uniform; gushing sprays of swords fastened in trophy form against the wall; flags of various kinds stuck here and there and yonder; more animals; more skins; here and there and everywhere more and more skins; skins of wild creatures, always, I believe;— believe;— believe;— believe;— beautiful skins. You couldn’t walk across that floor anywhere without stumbling over the hard heads of lions and things. You couldn’t put out a hand anywhere without laying it upon a velvety, velvety, velvety, velvety, exquisite tiger skin tiger skin tiger-skin or leopard skin, and so on—oh, on—oh, on—. Oh, —oh, TS1 read ‘on— Oh,’; SLC first revised it to ‘on. Oh,’ and then to ‘on—oh,’ on—oh, well, all the kinds of skins were there; it was as if a menagerie had undressed in the place. Then there was a most decided and rather unpleasant odor, which proceeded from disinfectants and preservatives and things such as you have to sprinkle on skins in order to discourage the moths—so it was not altogether a pleasant place, on that account. It was a kind of museum; museum; museum,; comma mended to a semicolon museum; and yet it was not the sort of museum which seemed dignified enough to be the museum of a great soldier—and so famous a soldier. It was the sort of museum which should delight and entertain little boys and girls. I suppose that that museum reveals a part of the General’s character and make. He is sweetly and winningly childlike. childlike. childlike. childlike. Once, in Hartford, Once, in Hartford, Once, in Hartford, x x x Jan. 17, 1906. Twichell Harris and I have been visiting Gen. Sickles. Once, in Hartford, [Dictated January 17, 1906.] . . . Rev. Joseph T. Harris and I have been visiting General Sickles. Once, twenty or twenty-five years ago, just as Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell T Harris ‘T’ inadvertently left uncanceled Harris was coming out of his gate Sunday morning to walk to his church and preach, a telegram was put into his hand. He read it immediately, and then, in a manner, collapsed. It said said said said: “General Sickles died last night at midnight.” midnight.” midnight.” midnight.” [He had been a chaplain under Sickles all through the war.] midnight.” [He had been a chaplain under Sickles through the war.] Well, you can see, now, that it Well, you can see, now, that it Well, you can see, now, that it Well, you can see, now, that iIt It wasn’t so. But no matter—it was so to Joe Joe Joe Joe T Harris Harris at the time. He walked along—walked to the church—but his mind was far away. All his affection and 1880 1880 not in 1880 inserted and partially boxed in the margin in blue pencil (1880.) inset homage and worship of his General had come to the fore. His heart was full of these emotions. He hardly knew where he was. In his pulpit, he stood up and began the service, but with a voice over which he had almost no command. The The But tThe The congregation had never seen him thus moved, before, moved, before, moved, before, moved, before, in his pulpit. They sat there and gazed at him and wondered what was the matter; because he was now reading, reading, reading, originally ‘reading’; underscore canceled reading, in this broken voice and with occasional occasional these occasional occasional tears trickling trickling dripping trickling trickling down his face, face, face—, he was reading face, what to them seemed a quite unemotional chapter—that one about Moses begat Aaron, and Aaron begat Deuteronomy, and Deuteronomy begat St. Peter, and St. Peter begat Cain, and Cain begat Abel Abel Able Ableel ‘le’ marked ‘tr’ in blue pencil Abel —and he was going along with this, and half crying—his voice continually breaking. The The And tThe The congregation left the the that that the the church that morning without being able to account for this most extraordinary thing— thing— thing,— thing— as it seemed to them. That a man who had been a soldier for more than four years, and who had preached in that pulpit so many, many times on really moving subjects, without even the quiver of a lip, without . . . lip, without . . . lip, without . . . lip, should break all down over the Begats Begats begattings begattings Begats , was a thing which was a thing which was a thing which not in they couldn’t understand. But there it is—any one can see how such a mystery as that would arouse the curiosity of those people to the boiling-point. Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell Harris Harris has had many adventures. He He Twitchell He He has more adventures in a year than anybody else has in five. One Saturday night he noticed a bottle on his wife’s wife’s wife’s uncle’s dressing-bureau. He thought the label said “Hair Restorer,” and he took it in his room and gave his head a good drenching and sousing with it and carried it back and thought no more about it. Next morning when he got up his head was a bright green! He sent around everywhere and couldn’t get a substitute-preacher substitute-preacher substitute-preacher substitute-preacher substitute preacher , so he had to go to his his his his church himself himself himself himself and preach—and he did it. He hadn’t a sermon in his barrel— barrel— barrel,— barrel— as it happened— happened— happened,— happened— of any lightsome character, so he had to preach a very grave one—a very serious one—and it made the matter worse. The gravity of the sermon did not harmonize with the gaiety gaiety gaiety gayety of his head, and the people sat all through it it that it it with handkerchiefs stuffed in their mouths mouths mouths—any way originally ‘anyway’; space inserted between ‘any’ and ‘way’ mouths—any way mouths to try to keep down their joy. And Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell Harris Harris told me that he was sure he never had seen his congregation—the the he had never seen the he had never seen the the whole body of his congregation—the entire body of his congregation—absorbed in interest in his sermon, from beginning to end, before. Always there had been an aspect of indifference, here and and or and and there, or wandering, wandering, wandering, wandering, somewhere; but this time there was nothing of the kind. kind. kind. kind. Those people sat there as if they thought, “Good for this day and train only: thought, “Good . . . only: thought, that “Now or never,“Good . . . only: thought, “Good . . . only: we must have all there is of this show, not waste waste most waste waste any of it.” it.” it—.” it.” And he said that when he came down out of the pulpit more people waited to shake him by the hand and tell him what a good sermon it was, than ever before. And it seemed a pity that these people should do these fictions in such a place—right in the church—when it was quite plain they were not interested in the sermon at all; they only wanted to get a near view of his head. Well, Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell Harris Harris said—no, Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell Harris Harris didn’t say, I say, that as the days went on and Sunday followed Sunday, the interest in Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell Harris’s Harris’s hair grew and grew; because it didn’t stay merely and monotonously green, it stay merely and monotonously green, it stay green. It stay merely and monotonously green., it It stay merely and monotonously green, it took on deeper and deeper shades of green; and then it would change and become reddish, and would go from that to some other color—purplish, yellowish, bluish, and so on— color—purplish, . . . on— color; color;—purplish, . . . so on— color—purplish, . . . so on— but it was never a solid color. It was always mottled. And each Sunday it was a little more interesting than it was the Sunday before—and Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s Harris’s Harris’s head became famous, and people came from New York New York New York New York, and Boston, and South Carolina, and Japan, and South Carolina, and Japan, and South Carolina, and South Carolina, and Japan, and South Carolina, and Japan, and so on, to look. on, to look. on., to look. on, to look. There wasn’t seating capacity for all the people that came seating capacity for . . . came seating capacity, for . . . came seating capacity for . . . came seating-capacity for . . . came while his head was undergoing these various and fascinating mottlings. mottlings. mottlings., for the people that came. mottlings. And it was a good thing in several ways, because the business had been languishing a little, and now a lot of people joined the church church church, church so that they could have the show, and the show, and these lights, and show, and the show, and it was the beginning of a prosperity for that church which has never diminished in all these years. Nothing so fortunate ever happened to Joe Joe Joe Joe Harris as that. Nothing so fortunate ever . . . as that. Nothing ever so fortunate ever . . . as that. Nothing so fortunate ever . . . as that. not in Well, he was telling—oh no, it was years ago, that he was telling about the sutler. In the Sickles brigade was a sutler, a Yankee, who was a wonderful person in the way of competency. All other sutlers got out of things on the eve of battle, during battle, after battle; not so with this sutler. He never got out of anything, and so he was very greatly respected and admired. There were times when he would get drunk. These were periodical drunks. You couldn’t tell when he was going to have an experience of that kind, therefore you did not know how to provide for it. It was very necessary to provide for it, because when he was drunk he had no respect for anybody’s feelings or desires. If he wanted to do so and so he would do it; nothing could coax him to do some other way. If he didn’t want to do a thing nobody could persuade him to do it. On one of these occasions of sutlerian eclipse General General Gen. Sickles had invited some other Generals Generals generals to dine with him in his headquarters-tent; his cook or his orderly, or somebody—the proper person—came to him aghast, and said “The sutler is drunk. We can’t have any dinner. There isn’t anything to cook and the sutler won’t sell us anything.” “Did you tell him it was General General Gen. Sickles who who who who who wanted these things?” “Yes, sir. It didn’t make any difference with the sutler.” “Well, can’t you get him to—” “No, sir, we can’t get him to do anything. We have got some beans, and that is all we have got. We have tried to get him to sell us just a pound of pork for the General, and he says he won’t.” General General Gen. Sickles said “Send for the chaplain. Let Chaplain Twichell go there. He is popular with that sutler; that sutler has great respect and reverence for Chaplain Twichell. Let him go there and see if he can’t prevail on the sutler to sell him a pound of salt pork for General Sickles.” Twichell went on the errand—stated his errand. The sutler propped himself unsteadily against some kind of a support, collected his thoughts, and the suitable words, and said, “Sell you a pound of pork for General Sickles? Naw. said, ¶ “Sell . . . Naw. said, no ¶ “Chap, sell ¶ “Sell you a pound of pork for General Sickles? a pound of pork? Naw. said no ¶ “Chap, sell General Sickles a pound of pork? Go back and tell him I wouldn’t sell you you him you him a pound of pork for God.” That was Twichell’s story of the episode. But I have wandered from that tree where General Sickles lay bleeding, bleeding, bleeding, bleeding, and arranging his last words. It was three-quarters of an hour before a surgeon could be found, for that was a tremendous battle and surgeons were needed everywhere. When the surgeon arrived it was after nightfall. It was a still and windless July night, and there was a candle burning—I think somebody sat near the General’s head and held this candle in his hand. It threw just light enough to make the General’s face distinct, and there were several dim dim dim dim figures waiting around about. about. about. who were dim and vague. about. Into this group, out of the darkness, bursts an aide; springs lightly from his horse, approaches this white-faced expiring General, straightens himself up up up, up soldier-fashion, salutes, and reports in the most soldierly and matter-of-fact matter-of-fact matter of fact way that he has carried out an order given him by the General, and that the movement of the regiments to the supporting point designated has been accomplished. The General thanked him courteously. I am sure Sickles must have been always polite. It takes training to enable a person to be properly courteous when he is dying. Many have tried it. I suppose very few have succeeded.