Second Preface, in Three Parts The Latest Attempt title The Latest Attempt The Latest Attempt. triple rule THE LATEST ATTEMPT single rule Finally, Finally, Finally, Finally in Florence in 1904, I hit upon the right way to do an Autobiography: start start start Start it at no particular time of your life; wander at your free will all over your life; talk only about the thing which interests interests inter- et ests corrected miswriting interests you for the moment; drop it the moment its interest threatens to pale, and turn your talk upon the new and more interesting thing that has intruded has intruded intrudeds has intruded has intruded itself into your mind meantime. Also, make the narrative a combined Diary and Autobiography. In this way you have the vivid things things things thing of the present to make a contrast with memories of like things in the past, and these contrasts have a charm which is all their own. No talent is required to make a combined combined Combined Diary and Autobiography interesting. And so, I have found the right plan. It makes my labor labor work labor labor amusement—mere amusement, play, pastime, and wholly effortless. It is the first time in history that the right plan has been hit upon. The Final (and Right) Plan The Final (and Right) Plan THE FINAL (AND RIGHT) PLAN. centered on an otherwise blank page and underscored three times to capitalize The Final (and Right) Plan I will construct a text—to precede the Autobiography; also a Preface, to follow said Text. ¶ I will construct a text— . . . Text. centered A Text For All Biographies. no ¶ I will construct a text: ¶ I will construct a text: —to precede the Autobiography; also a Preface, to follow said Text. no ¶ I will construct a text: What a wee little part of a person’s life are are is are are his acts and his words! His real life is led in his head, and is known to none but himself. All day long, and every day, the mill of his brain is grinding, and his thoughts, (which are but the mute articulation of his feelings,) (which are but the mute articulation of his feelings,) not in (which are the but the mute ar articulation of his feelings,) not those other things, are his history. His acts acts acts acts ‘acts’ underscored and his words words words words ‘words’ underscored are merely the visible visible visible, visible, thin crust of his world, with its scattered snow summits and its vacant wastes of water—and they are so trifling a part of his bulk! bulk! book! bulk! bulk! a mere skin enveloping it. The mass of him is hidden—it and its volcanic fires that toss and boil, and never rest, night nor nor nor nor day. These are his life These are his life These are his life These are his life ‘These are his life’ underscored , and they are not written, and cannot be written. Every day would make a whole book of eighty thousand words—three hundred and sixty-five books a year. Biographies are but the clothes and buttons of the man—the biography of the man himself cannot be written. Preface. As from the Grave I. Preface As from the Grave I. in top margin Preface for all editions of the book. To precede the Florentine dictation. centered PREFACE. As from the Grave. ‘PREFACE.’ written in full capitals, underscored triple rule in top margin Preface for all editions of the book. To precede the Florentine dictation. centered PREFACE. As from the Grave. I. centered PREFACE As From the Grave I In this Autobiography I shall keep in mind the fact that I am speaking from the grave. I am literally literally literally literally speaking from the grave, because I shall be dead when the book issues from the press. At any rate—to be precise—nineteen-twentieths of the book will not see print until after my death. At any rate—to be precise—nineteen-twentieths of the book will not see print until after my death. not in At any rate—to be precise—nineteen-twentieths of the book will not see print until after my death. not in I speak from the grave rather than with my living tongue, for a good reason: I can speak thence thence more thence thence freely. When a man is writing a book dealing with the privacies of his life—a book dealing with the privacies of his life—a book dealing with the privacies of his life—a book dealing with the privacies of his life—a book which is to be read while he is still alive— alive— alive— alive— he shrinks from speaking his whole frank frank frank frank mind; all his attempts to do it fail, he recognizes that he he he◇ he is trying to do a thing which is wholly impossible to a human being. The frankest and freëst freëst freëst freëst dieresis added in pencil freëst and privatest and privatest and privatest and privatest product of the human mind and heart is a love letter love letter love letter love-letter ; the writer writer wr writer corrected miswriting writer gets his limitless freedom of statement and expression from his sense that no stranger is going to see what he is writing. Sometimes there is a breach of promise case by and by; case by and by; case, by and by; case by and by; and when he sees his letter in print it makes him cruelly uncomfortable, and he perceives that he never would have unbosomed himself to that large and honest degree if he had known that he was writing for the public. He cannot find anything in the letter that was not true, honest, and respect-worthy; but no matter, he would have been very much more reserved if he had known he was writing for print. It has seemed to me that I could be as frank and free and unembarrassed as a love letter love letter love letter love-letter if I knew knew knoew knew that what I was was was was writing would be exposed to no eye until I was dead, and unaware, unaware, safe unaware, unaware, unaware and indifferent. indifferent. indifferent. flush right Mark Twain paraph indifferent. II. II. II. II My editors, heirs and assigns are hereby instructed to leave out of the first edition all characterizations of friends and enemies that might wound the feelings of either the persons characterized or their families and kinship. This book is not a revenge-record. When I build a fire under a person in it, I do not do it merely because of the enjoyment I get out of seeing him fry, but because he is worth the trouble. It is then a compliment, a distinction; let him give thanks and keep quiet. I do not fry the small, the commonplace, the unworthy. From the first, second, third and fourth editions editions editions mus editions all sound and sane sound and sane sound,and sane, and intelligent sound and sane expressions of opinion must be left out. There may be a market for that kind of wares a century from now. There is no hurry. Wait and see. III. III. III. III. III The editions should be issued twenty-five years apart. Many things that must be left out of the first will be proper for the second; many things that must be left out of both will be proper for the third; into the fourth—or at least the fifth— fifth— fifth,— fifth— fifth,— the whole Autobiography can go, unexpurgated. Mark Twain Mark Twain Here . . . Dictations. Mark Twain paraph new page Here begins the Florentine Dictations. double rules above and below inscription (Signed) Mark Twain. ¶ Here begin the Florentine Dictations. Mark Twain no ¶ Here begin the Florentine Dictations.