19 February 1908 Dictated February February Feb. 19, 1908 Mr. Clemens sails again for Bermuda three three 3 days hence—Copy of Mr. Clemens’s letter to Miss Jean about Miss Clemens’s musicale—The party at Sherry’s, the interesting people there, and the many dissipations which precede the second trip to Bermuda. I sail for Bermuda three days hence, but not for my health. Last Thursday I had an energetic day, followed by an equally energetic and stirring night. I wrote Jean about these wholesome dissipations next morning: Dearest Dearest Feb. 14/08. Dearest Dearest Jean, I must snatch a moment to tell you about Clara’s musicale of last night. It was very rainy, but no matter about 140 of the 160 guests invited came to the show—and very choice people they were, too, bright, and cultivated. Clara was beautiful to look at, and her voice was in great form. She was a picture of grace, and ease, and conscious mastery of the situation. Sometimes situation. Sometimes situation. Sometimes situation. ; . SsSometimes ‘situation. Sometimes’ altered to ‘situation; sometimes’ and then restored she was playful and cunning; sometimes cunning; sometimes cunning, sometimes cunning. S; sometimes period mended to a semicolon she was sweetly and eloquently moving and pathetic, sometimes she was a storm, sometimes she was a majestic tragedy queen; and in all her moods she was an expert in expression, and carried the house! It was a splendid triumph. Everybody praised her singing singing sinihging corrected miswriting singing. , praised it with enthusiasm, and praised her acting in the same measure. They couldn’t talk about anything else. Melville Stone, head of the Associated Press, was present, and he told Miss Lyon to furnish him any chance that might occur for him to be of service to Clara, and he would spread her merit from one end of the country to the other. Miss Nichols played divinely, and she and Clara did a duet that so delighted the house that they had to do it all over again. And there were other encores. It was a great night. At midnight I went to a big supper and ball at Sherry’s, and enjoyed it thoroughly till 4.05 a.m., when I came away with the last of the rioters. I have been dictating, this morning, and am going to play billiards all the afternoon. I hope you are well and happy. With ever ever every ever so much love, dear Jean— Father. Father. Father. [paraph] Father. The party at Sherry’s was continuously interesting, from the beginning to the end. It was given by Robert Collier. He, and that sweet and beautiful girl, his wife, were at Clara’s musicale, and we departed for Sherry’s in their automobile at midnight. It was a large company, and was made up of well-known names. Among them was John Hay’s poet-daughter, Mrs. Payne Whitney. I had not seen her since she was a little child. Neither her mother’s nor her husband’s limitless millions have smothered her literary gift or beguiled her into neglecting it. Among them, also, was her sister-in-law, Mrs. Harry Payne Whitney, who is likewise staggering under weighty weighty prodigal weighty millions, but slaves daily and enthusiastically and faithfully at her statuary work, like the loftiest minded poor devotee of the great arts in the land. Twice, under the concealment of fictitious names, she has carried off the first prize in important public competitions. Prince Troubetskoi was there, a fine man and diligent and successful artist. I have known him some time. His wife is Amélie Amélie Ameélie accent added Rives, the poet. The lovely lovely dear and lovely Ethel Barrymore, actress, was there. She is the sole support of her widowed mother’s family, and has been working hard and making and saving a deal of money these many months, and now misfortune has befallen her. A few nights ago, when she was absent at the theatre, a burglar entered her apartment and carried off every valuable thing she had in the world, including her accumulated money, which she kept at home because in these disastrous and panicky days she was afraid to trust it in a bank. Nazimova, the illustrious Russian actress, actress, actress was there, a most interesting character; I had not seen her before, either on the stage or elsewhere. She talks in easy and flowing and correct English, and she was playing in it acceptably two and a half months after her tongue’s first contact with it. She said she was born and reared in Switzerland, and at eleven didn’t know a Russian word; then she took lessons and acquired her native tongue by the same laborious processes required in mastering a foreign one. I was at home by half past half past half-past four in the morning, in bed at five, asleep at six, and ready for breakfast at eight—refreshed and ready for more activities. They were liberally furnished, and have been industriously carried on ever since. Yesterday I spent two pleasant and exciting hours witnessing a Ben Jonson Jonson Johnson masque performed at the Plaza Hotel by about twenty young and attractive creatures of the two sexes, and it was wonderful wonderful a wonder-ful thing for rich and beautiful costumes, for excellent singing, and for acting which I had not seen approached before by amateurs. I dined out in the evening at the Doubledays’ Doubledays’ Doubledays’ , and went from there to the Guinnesses’ Guinnesses’ Guinnesses , in Washington Square. By eleven a great throng had gathered. There was fine instrumental music and fine singing. The illustrious Caruso was present. I had not seen him before, before, before, off the operatic stage. It was a highly fashionable company, but I went in white clothes, because that is my custom, and because everybody approves it. That bright and engaging and untamed young Virginian, a a a distant cousin of mine, Mrs. William Waldorf Astor, who is over from England on a visit to her people, was there, and at midnight she dragged me into the middle of the room and commanded the music to strike up and then she required me to dance with her. I was willing; I had never danced, but I always knew I could do it if I wanted to. Our performance brought down the house, as the phrase goes, and I privately thought it was rather unusually good myself—and I knew there was a sufficiency of life and activity in it, for one thing. We got an immense encore and responded to it, adding several fresh and hitherto unattempted and finely artistic variations. I promised to visit her in England next summer, and spend a few weeks at Cliveden. I probably can’t go, but I would greatly like to see that wonderful place. Shortly after midnight I came away with Prince Troubetskoi and Peter Dunne (“Mr. Dooley”); many were departing, but many were arriving to take their places. It is as I said, I am not leaving for Bermuda to build up my health, for there is nothing the matter with it; I am going because a change of scene and climate is absolutely necessary for H. H. Rogers, and he won’t go unless I go too. I have divested myself of engagements until the 16th of April.