[The Tennessee Land] Clemens wrote this manuscript, now in the Mark Twain Papers, sometime in 1870, leaving it incomplete and without a title (but with space for one on the first page). It is the earliest extant manuscript that might fairly be called a draft chapter for his autobiography, although he did not explicitly identify it as such. He evidently planned to publish it in some way, for he changed the reference to his father’s nemesis from “Ira Stout” to “Ira ––––.” The text has never been accurately published before. Albert Bigelow Paine did include it in Mark Twain’s Autobiography under the title he gave it, “The Tennessee Land,” but he silently omitted the anecdote at the end of the third paragraph (beginning with “A venerable lady . . .”) and changed Clemens’s description of his father as a “candidate for county judge, with a certainty of election” to say instead that he “had been elected to the clerkship of the Surrogate Court” (MTA, 1:3–6; neither description is accurate: see the Appendix “Family Biographies,” p. 654). Charles Neider reprinted the text from the manuscript, restoring the anecdote omitted by Paine but adopting Paine’s changed description of John Marshall Clemens; he also made dozens of his own omissions and changes, and he appended two paragraphs from “My Autobiography [Random Extracts from It],” written in Vienna in 1897–98 (AMT, 22–24). Clemens returned to the subject of the Tennessee land in that manuscript and in the Autobiographical Dictation of 5 April 1906. John Marshall Clemens’s land purchases and the family’s subsequent sales of the land have been only partly documented from independent sources. The extant grants, deeds, and bills of sale are incomplete, but it was also the case that contradictory or inaccurate deeds often led to disputed claims. Orion Clemens referred to one cause of such conflict in a letter to his brother on 7 July 1869, alleging that “Tennessee grants the same land over and over again to different parties” (OC to SLC, 7 July 1869, CU-MARK, quoted in 3? July 1869 to OC, L3, 279 n. 1 [bottom]; for family correspondence on the subject from 1853 to 1870, see L1, L2, L3, and L4). [The Tennessee Land] [The Tennessee Land] not in The monster monster no monster tract of land which our family own in Tennessee, was purchased by my father a little over forty years ago. He bought the enormous area of seventy-five thousand seventy-five thousand 75,000 seventy-five thousand acres at one purchase. The entire lot must have cost him somewhere in the neighborhood of four four a four hundred dollars. That was a good deal of money to pass over at one payment in those days—at least it was so considered was so considered was, so considered away up up a up there there there, in the pineries and the “Knobs” of the Cumberland Mountains of of in of Fentress county, East Tennessee. When my father paid down that great sum, and turned and stood in the courthouse courthouse court-house door of Jamestown, and looked abroad over his vast possessions, he said: “Whatever befalls me, my heirs heirs children heirs are secure; I shall not live to see these acres turn to silver and gold, but my children will.” Thus, with the very kindest intentions in the world toward us, he laid the heavy curse of prospective wealth upon our shoulders. He shoulders. He shoulders and. He went to his grave in the full belief that he had done us a kindness. It was a woful mistake, but fortunately he never knew it. He ¶ He flush left ¶ He further said: “Iron ore is abundant in this tract, and there are other minerals; there are thousands of acres of the finest yellow pine timber in America, and it can be rafted down Obeds river to the Cumberland Cumberland cCumberland , down the Cumberland to the Ohio, down the Ohio to the Mississippi Mississippi Mississisppi , and down the Mississippi to any community that wants it. There is no end to the tar, pitch and turpentine which these vast pineries will yield. This is a natural wine district, too; there are no vines elsewhere in America, cultivated cultivated that cultivated or otherwise, that yield such grapes as grow wild here. There are grazing lands, corn lands, wheat lands, potato lands, there are all species of timber—there is everything in and on this great tract of land that can make land valuable. The United States contain fourteen millions of inhabitants; the population has increased eleven millions in forty years, and will henceforth increase faster than ever; my my the my children will see the day that immigration will push its way to Fentress county, Tennessee, and then, with seventy-five thousand seventy-five thousand 75,000 acres of excellent land in their hands, they will become fabulously wealthy.” Everything my father said about the capabilities of the land was perfectly true—and he could have added with like truth, that there were inexhaustible mines of coal on the land, but the chances are that he knew very little about the article, for the innocent Tennesseeans were not accustomed to digging in the earth for their fuel. And my father might have added to the list of eligibilities, that the land was only a hundred miles from Knoxville Knoxville Nashville and Knocxville , and right where some future line of railway leading south from Cincinnati could not help but pass through it. But he never had seen a railway, and it is barely possible that that that had he had not even heard of such a thing. Curious as it may seem, as late as eight years ago there were people people aged people living close to Jamestown who never had heard of a railroad and could not be brought brought persu brought to believe in steamboats. They do not vote for Jackson in Fentress county, they vote for Washington. A venerable lady of that locality said of her son: “Jim’s come back from Kaintuck and fotch a stuck-up gal stuck-up gal gal stuck-up gal with him from up thar; and bless you they’ve got more new-fangled notions, massy on us! Common log house ain’t good enough for them—no indeedy!—but they’ve tuck ’n’ gaumed the inside of theirn all over with some kind of nasty disgustin’ truck which they say say calls it pl say is all the go in Kaintuck Kaintuck Kaintuck, and which they amongst the upper hunky, hunky, classes, hunky, and which they calls it plarsterin’!” plarsterin’!” plar plarsterin’!” rewritten for clarity My ¶ My ¶ My br brother ¶ My ‘br’ miswritten eldest brother was four or five years old when the great purchase was made, and my eldest sister was an infant in arms. The rest of us—and we formed the great bulk of the family—came came were came afterwards, and were born along from time to time during the next ten ten fourteen ten years. Four years after the purchase came the great financial crash of ’34, and in that storm my father’s fortunes father’s fortunes father’s went down. fortunes suffered shipwreck. were wrecked. From being honored honored honored as and quoted honored and envied as the most opulent citizen of Fentress county—for outside of his great great great landed possessions he was considered to be worth not less than three thousand five hundred dollars—he suddenly woke up and found himself reduced to less than one-fourth of that amount. He was a proud man, man, man,— a silent, austere man, and not not not of a temper p a person likely to likely to likely to brook receive accept accept the loss of his grandeur He moved to accept the loss loss of his grandeur with double canceled ‘accept’ and double canceled ‘loss’ miswritten abide among the scenes of his vanished grandeur and be the target target tar object of target for public commiseration. He gathered together his household and journeyed many tedious days through wilderness solitudes, toward what was then the “Far West,” and at last pitched his tent in the almost invisible little town of Florida, Monroe county Florida, Monroe county Florida;, Monroe count Monroe county semicolon mended to a comma , Missouri. He “kept store” there several years, but had no luck, except that I was born to him. He He Those were He presently removed to Hannibal, and prospered somewhat, and rose to the dignity of justice of the peace, and was candidate for county judge, with a certainty of election, when the summons came which no man may disregard. He had been doing tolerably well, for that age of the world, during the first years of his residence in Hannibal, but ill fortune tripped him once more. He did the friendly office of “going security” for Ira ——, and Ira —— walked Ira ——, and Ira —— walked Ira Stout; , & Ira Stout walked ——, and Ira —— walked off and deliberately took the benefit of the new bankrupt law— law— law—and now, after a deed which enabled him to live easily and comfortably along till death called for him, but a deed which ruined my father, sent him poor to his grave, and condemned his heirs to a long and discouraging struggle with the world for a livelihood. But my father would brighten up and gather heart, even upon his death-bed, when he thought of the Tennessee land. He said that it would soon make us all rich and happy. And so believing, he died. We straightway turned our turned our fixed our turned our waiting eyes upon Tennessee. Through Tennessee. Through Tennessee.— Through all our wanderings and all our ups and downs for thirty years they have still gazed gazed loo gazed thitherward, over intervening continents and seas, and and and now at this very day they day they day our They are yet looking toward the same fixed point, with the hope of old habit and a faith that rises and falls, but never dies. After my father’s death we we we we corrected miswriting reorganized the domestic establishment, but on a temporary basis, intending to arrange it permanently after the land was sold. My brother borrowed five hundred dollars and bought a worthless weekly newspaper, believing, as we all did, that it was not worth while to go at anything in serious earnest until the land was disposed of and we could embark intelligently intelligently in a body intelligently in something. something. something. which We rented rented rented a house, at first a large house to live in, at first, but we were disappointed in a sale we had expected to make (the man wanted only a part of the land and and w and we talked it over and decided to sell all or none,) and we were obliged to move to a less expensive one.