Scraps from My Autobiography. From Chapter IX Clemens wrote the manuscript of “Scraps from My Autobiography. From Chapter IX” (now in the Mark Twain Papers) in London in 1900. He later asked his daughter Jean to type it, probably in 1902, and then lightly revised her typescript. By early August 1906, when George Harvey was induced to read the autobiography in typescript and instantly suggested selections for publication in the North American Review, Clemens had already decided not to include this long reminiscence of childhood in his plan for the autobiography. Harvey read Jean’s typescript and chose the first part for the Review, and Josephine Hobby retyped it to make printer’s copy for the 21 September 1906 issue, which Clemens then revised once more (NAR 2). Clemens later decided to publish the second part in the Review as well, making further changes to the text before it appeared in the 3 May 1907 issue (NAR 17). Despite these several layers of revision and the inclusion of almost all of the manuscript in the serial publication, the text was never incorporated into the final form of the autobiography. Paine misdated the manuscript 1898 and published it as “Playing ‘Bear’––Herrings––Jim Wolf and the Cats,” censoring it in his usual manner (MTA, 1:125–43). For instance, Clemens’s reference to his companion as the “little black slave boy” became just “little black boy,” and his exuberant “Dey eats ’em guts and all!” (twice) became “Dey eats ’em innards and all!”––both softenings that Clemens himself did not make for the Review. Although Neider had access to the original manuscript, he instead copied Paine’s text, inserting a section from the Autobiographical Dictation of 13 February 1906 (AMT, 37–43, 44–47). Scraps from My AutobiographyFrom Chapter IX title Scraps from My Autobiography . . . Chapter IX Selections Scraps from my Autobiography. double rule Passages fFrom Chapter IX. double rule MS revisions, made after TS Jean was typed, adopted here Selections from my Autobiography. double rule Passages from Chapter IX. double rule This This This * * * This . . . This was in 1849. 1849 1849 not in 1849. inserted in the margin I was fourteen years old, then. We were still living in Hannibal, Missouri, on the banks of the Mississippi, in the new “frame” house built by my father five years before.That is, some of us lived in the new part, part, part, and revised in pencil part, the rest in the old part back of it—the “L.” —the “L.” and attached to it. and attached to it. —the “L.” —the “L.” In the autumn my sister gave a party, and invited all the marriageable marriageable marriageable marriageable young people of the village. I was too young for this society, and was too bashful to mingle with young ladies ladies ladies ladies, anyway anyway anyway any way , therefore I was not invited—at least not for the whole evening. Ten minutes of it was to be my whole share. I was to do the part of a bear in a small fairy-play fairy-play fairy-play fairy-play fairy play . I was to be disguised all over all over all over all over in a close-fitting brown hairy stuff proper for a bear. About half past ten I was told to go to my room and put on this disguise, and be ready in half an hour. I started, but changed my mind; for I wanted to practice practice practice practicse practicse practise a little, and that room was very small. I crossed crossed crossed crossed over to the large unoccupied unoccupied unoccupied unoccupied house on the corner of Main and Hill streets,That house still stands. and Hill streets,* footnote: ¶ That house still stands. street, and Hill streets,* footnote: ¶ *That house still stands. and Hill streets,* footnote: ¶ *That house still stands. unaware that a dozen of the young people were also going there to dress for their parts. I took the little black slave black slave black black slave black slave boy, Sandy, with me, and we selected a roomy and empty chamber on the second floor. We entered it talking, and this gave a couple of half-dressed young ladies an opportunity to take refuge behind a screen undiscovered. Their gowns and things were hanging on hooks behind the door, but I did not see them; it was Sandy that shut the door, but all his heart was in the theatricals, and he was as unlikely to notice them as I was myself. That was a rickety screen, with many holes in it, but as I did not know there were girls behind it, I was not disturbed by that detail. If I had known, I could not have undressed undressed undressed undressed deleted, then restored with the instruction ‘STET’ in the flood of cruel moonlight that was pouring in at the curtainless windows; I should have died of shame. Untroubled by apprehensions, I stripped to the skin and began my practice. I was full of ambition; I was determined to make a hit, hit, hit, hit; I was burning to establish a reputation as a bear and get further engagements; so I threw myself into my work with an abandon that promised great things. I capered back and forth forth forth fourth from one end of the room to the other on all fours, Sandy applauding with enthusiasm; I walked upright and growled and snapped and snarled; I stood on my head, I flung handsprings, handsprings, handsprings, I did handsprings, I danced a lubberly lubberly lubberly lubberlmy dance with my paws bent and my imaginary imaginary imaginary imaginary snout sniffing from side to side; side; side, side,; comma mended to a semicolon side; I did everything a bear could do, and many things which no bear could ever do and no bear with any dignity would want to do, anyway; and of course I never suspected that I was making a spectacle of myself to any one any one any one anyone but Sandy. At last, standing on my head, I paused in that attitude to take a minute’s rest. There was a moment’s silence, then Sandy spoke up with excited interest and said— “Marse Sam, has you ever seen seen seed seedn seen a dried dried smoked dried revised in pencil smoked herring?” “No. What is that?” “It’s a fish.” “Well, what of it? Anything peculiar about it?” “Yes, suh, you bet you dey is. Dey eats ’em guts and all!” There was a smothered burst of feminine snickers from behind the screen! All the strength went out of me and I toppled forward like an undermined tower and brought the screen down with my weight, burying the young ladies under it. In their fright they discharged a couple of piercing screams—and possibly others, but I did not wait to count. I snatched my clothes and fled to the dark hall below, Sandy following. I was dressed in half a minute, and out the back way. I swore Sandy to eternal silence, then we went away and hid until the party was over. The ambition was all out of me. I could not have faced that giddy company that giddy company thatose giddy people company that giddy company after my adventure, for there would be two performers there who knew my secret, and would be privately laughing at me all the time. I was searched for but not found, and the bear had to be played by a young gentleman in his civilized clothes. The house was still and everybody asleep when I finally ventured home. I was very heavy-hearted, and full of a bitter sense bitter sense bitter sense sense of disgrace. Pinned to my pillow I found a slip of paper which bore a line which which which which that that did not lighten my heart, but only made my face burn. It was written in a laboriously disguised hand, and these were its mocking terms: “You probably couldn’t have played bear, but you played bare very well bear, but you played bare very well bear, but you played bare very well bear, but you played bare very well ‘but you played bare very well’ underscored bear, but you played bare very well bear, but you played bare very well ‘bear’ underscored and marked ‘ital’; ‘but you played’ underscored and marked ‘roman’; SLC noted in the margin, ‘Of course they would have italicised only “bear” and “bare.” Ain’t it so? Mark [paraph]’ bear, but you played bare very well —oh, very very very very very very very vvery very very well!” We think boys are rude rude rude, rude, unsensitive animals, but it is not so so so, so in all cases. Each boy has one or two sensitive spots, and if you can find out where they are located you have only to touch them and you can scorch him as with fire. I suffered miserably over that episode. I expected that the facts would be all over the village in the morning, but it was not so. The secret remained confined to the two girls and Sandy and me. That was some appeasement of my pain, but it was far from sufficient—the main trouble remained: I was under four mocking eyes, and it might as well have been a thousand, for I suspected all girls’ eyes of being the ones I so dreaded. During several weeks I could not look any young lady in the face; I dropped my eyes in confusion when any one of them smiled upon me and gave me greeting; and I said to myself, “That is one of them,” “That is one of them,” “That is one of them,” “That is one of them,” ‘That is one of them,’ underscored “That is one of them,” and got quickly away. Of course I was meeting the right girls everywhere, but if they ever let slip any any any in any betraying sign I was not bright enough to catch it. When I left Hannibal four years later, the secret was still a secret; I had never guessed those girls out, and was no longer expecting expecting hoping or expecting hoping or expecting expecting to do it. Nor wanting to, either. Nor wanting to, either. not in Nor wanting to, either. Nor wanting to, either. One of the dearest and dearest and dearest and dearest and prettiest girls in the village at the time of my mishap was one whom I will call Mary Wilson, because that was not her name. She was twenty years old; she was twenty years old; she was twenty years old; she was twenty years old; she was dainty and sweet, peach-bloomy and exquisite, gracious and peach-bloomy and exquisite, gracious and and peach-bloomy and exquisite, gracious and peach-bloomy and exquisite, gracious and lovely in in in her in character, and I stood stood was stood stood in awe of her, for she seemed to me to be made out of angel-clay and rightfully unapproachable by by by just by just by an unholy ordinary kind of boy boy boy a boy like me. I probably never suspected suspected sus dreamed of suspected suspected her her her hher her . But— The scene changes. To Calcutta—forty-seven years later. It was in 1896. I arrived there on my my a a my my lecturing trip. As I entered the hotel a divine vision divine vision vision divine vision divine vision passed out of it, clothed in the glory of the Indian sunshine—the Mary Wilson of my long-vanished boyhood! It was a startling thing. Before I could recover from the bewildering bewildering pleasant pleasant bewildering bewildering shock and speak to her she was gone. I thought maybe I had seen an apparition, but it was not so, she was flesh. She was the grand-daughter grand-daughter grand-daughter granddaughter of the other Mary, the original Mary. That other Mary, the original Mary. That other Mary. The other other Mary. The other , the original Mary. That other Mary, the original Mary. That Mary, now a widow, Mary, now a widow, Mary, now a widow, Mary, now a widow, was up stairs up stairs up stairs up-stairs , and presently sent for me. She was old and gray-haired, but she looked young and was very handsome. We sat down and talked. We steeped our thirsty souls in the reviving wine wine wine souls wine ‘souls’ deleted in pencil and ‘wine’ typed above it of the past, the pathetic past, the pathetic past, the pathetic past, not in the beautiful past, the dear and lamented past; we uttered the names that had been silent upon our lips for fifty years, and it was as if they were made of music; with reverent hands we unburied our dead, the mates of our youth, and caressed them with our speech; we searched the dusty chambers of our memories and dragged forth incident after incident, episode after episode, folly after folly, and laughed such good laughs over them, with the tears running down; and finally Mary said suddenly, and without any leading-up leading-up leading-up leading up — “Tell me! What is the special peculiarity of dried dried smoked dried revised in pencil smoked herrings?” It seemed a strange question at such a hallowed time as this. And so inconsequential, too. I was a little shocked. And yet I was aware of a stir of some kind away back in the deeps of my memory somewhere. It set me to musing—thinking—searching. Dried Dried Smoked Dried revised in pencil Smoked herrings. Dried Dried Smoked Dried revised in pencil Smoked herrings. The peculiarity of dr . . . . dr . . . . smo . . . . . dr— . . . . revised in pencil smo . . . . . I glanced up. Her face was grave, but there was a dim dim glim dim ‘dim’ written over wiped-out ‘glim’, then deleted and rewritten for clarity dim and shadowy twinkle in her eye which— All which— All which— □ All which— All which— □ All box inserted to indicate space of a sudden I knew! and far away down in the hoary past I heard a remembered voice murmur, “Dey eats ’em guts and all!” “At—last! I’ve found one of you, anyway! Who was the other girl?” But she drew the line there. She wouldn’t tell me. But a But a But a But a A revised in blue pencil A boy’s life is not all comedy; much of the tragic enters into it. The drunken tramp—mentioned in “Tom Sawyer” or “Huck Finn”—who was burned up in the village jail, lay upon 1849 1849 not in 1849 inserted and boxed in the margin in blue pencil 1849. inset my conscience a hundred nights afterward and “Tom Sawyer” or “Huck Finn”—who . . . afterward and an earlier chapter—who . . . afterward and an earlier chapter—who “Tom Sawyer” or “Huck Finn”—who . . . afterward and “Tom Sawyer” or — lay upon my conscience a hundred nights afterward and “Huck Finn”—who was burned up in the village jail, written in the margin: ‘(transpose these lines.)’ 2 1 “Tom Sawyer” or “Huck Finn”—who . . . afterward and filled them with hideous dreams—dreams in which I saw his appealing appealing appealing appealing face as I had seen it in the pathetic reality, pressed against the window-bars, with the red red red red hell glowing behind him—a face which seemed to say to me, “If If if iIf If you had not given given given give me the matches, this would not have happened; you are responsible for my death.” I was not not not nnot first ‘n’ of ‘nnot’ canceled by Harvey; ‘not’ underscored in blue pencil by SLC responsible for it, for I had meant him no harm, but only good, when I let him have the matches matches matches matchers ; but no matter, mine was a trained Presbyterian conscience, and knew but the one duty—to hunt and harry harry on harry harry its slave upon all pretexts and on on on on all occasions; particularly when there was no sense nor nor nor nor or reason in it. The tramp—who was to blame—suffered ten minutes; I, who was not to blame, suffered suffered got suffered suffered three months. The shooting down of poor old Smarr in the main streetSee “Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.” street* footnote: ¶ *See “Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.” street. street.* footnote: ¶ See “Aventures of Huckleberry Finn.” revised in pencil street* footnote: ¶ *See “Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.” at noonday supplied me with some more dreams; and in them I always saw again the grotesque closing picture—the great family Bible spread open on the profane old man’s breast by some thoughtful idiot, by some thoughtful idiot, by some thoughtful idiot, by some thoughtful idiot, and rising and sinking sinking f sinking sinking to the labored breathings, and adding the torture of its leaden weight to the dying struggles. We are curiously made. In all the throng of gaping and sympathetic onlookers there was not one with there was not one with with there was not one with there was not one with common sense enough to perceive that an anvil would have been in better taste there than the Bible, less open to sarcastic criticism, and and and and and swifter in its atrocious work. In my nightmares I gasped and struggled for breath under the crush of that vast book for many a night. All within the space of a couple of years we had two or three other tragedies, and I had the ill luck ill luck ill luck ill-luck to be too near-by near-by near by near-by on each occasion. There was the slave man who was struck down with a chunk of slag slag slang slag for some small offence offence offence soffence ; I saw him die. And the young Californian Californian Californian California emigrant who was stabbed with a bowie knife by a drunken comrade: I saw the red life gush from his breast. And the case of the rowdy young Hyde Hyde Z— Z— Hyde Hyde brothers brothers brothers, brothers and their harmless old uncle: one of them held the old man down with his knees on his breast while the other one tried repeatedly to kill him with an Allen revolver which wouldn’t go off. I happened along just then, of course. Then there was the case of the young Californian Californian Californian California emigrant who got drunk and proposed to raid the “Welshman’s house” all alone one dark and threatening night.Used in—“Huck Finn,” I think. night.† footnote: ¶ †Used in—“Huck Finn,” I think. night. night.* footnote: ¶*Used in—“Huck Finn,” I think. revised in pencil night.* footnote: ¶ *Used in “Huck Finn,” I think. night.† footnote: ¶ †Used in “Huck Finn,” I think. This house stood half way up up up to up Holliday’s Hill (“Cardiff” Hill), Holliday’s Hill (“Cardiff” Hill), Holliday’s Hill Holliday’s Hill, (“Cardiff” Hill), Holliday’s Hill (“Cardiff” Hill), and its sole occupants were a poor but quite respectable widow and her blameless blameless young and blameless young and blameless daughter. The invading ruffian woke the whole village with his ribald yells and coarse challenges and obscenities. I went up there with a comrade—John Briggs, I think—to look and listen. The figure of the man was dimly visible; the women were on their porch, but not visible in in in the darkness of its in the deep shadow of its roof, but we heard the elder elder elder elder woman’s voice. She voice. She voice. plainly enough. The widow She voice. She had loaded an old musket with slugs, and she warned the man that if he he she he stayed where he was while she counted ten it would cost him his life. She She ◇ She canceled character partly formed She began to count, slowly; slowly; slowly; slowly: he began to laugh. He stopped stopped stopped stopped inserted in blue pencil above overtyped ‘ bega stopped’ laughing at “six;” “six;” six;” “six”; then through the deep stillness, stillness, stillnighess, followed stillness, in a steady voice, followed the rest of the tale: “seven . . . . eight . . . . nine”—a long pause, pause, pause, —“ten!” pause, we holding our breath—“ten!” “ten!” “ten!” “ten!” ‘ “ten!” ’ underscored in blue pencil A red spout of flame gushed out into the night, and the man dropped, with his breast riddled to rags. Then the rain and the thunder burst loose and the waiting town swarmed up the hill in the glare of the lightning like an invasion of ants. Those people saw the rest; I had had my share and was satisfied. I went home to dream, and was not disappointed. My teaching and training enabled me to see deeper into these tragedies than an ignorant person could have done. done. done. I tried to disguise it done. I knew what they were for. I tried to disguise it from myself, but down in the secret deeps of my troubled heart troubled heart troubled heart heart I knew—and I knew knew knew kknew that first ‘k’ of ‘kknew’ canceled and ‘knew’ underscored in blue pencil knew that I knew. They were inventions of Providence Providence Providence to lead me to Providence to beguile me to a better life. It sounds curiously innocent and conceited, now, but to me there was nothing strange about it; it was quite in accordance with the thoughtful and judicious ways of Providence as I understood them. It would not have surprised me, nor even over-flattered over-flattered over-flattered over-flattered me me me me, me, if Providence had killed off that whole community in trying to save an asset like me. in trying . . . me. in my interest. in trying . . . me. in trying . . . me. Educated as I had been, it would have seemed just the thing, and well worth the expense. Why Why Why WWhy first ‘W’ of ‘WWhy’ canceled and ‘Why’ underscored in blue pencil Providence should take such an anxious interest in such a property—that idea never entered my head, and there was no one in that simple hamlet who would have dreamed of putting it there. For one thing, no one was equipped with it. It is quite true: true: true: true I took all the tragedies to myself; and tallied them off off off off, in turn as they happened, saying to myself in each case, with a sigh, “Another one gone—and on my account; this ought to bring me to repentance; His patience His patience the patience of God the His patience of God His patience will not always endure.” And yet privately I believed it would. That is, I believed it in the daytime; but not but not but at night not not but not in the night. With the going down of the sun my faith failed, and the clammy the clammy the cal the clammy possibly ‘the col’ the clammy fears gathered about my heart. It was then that I repented. Those were awful nights, nights of despair, nights charged with the bitterness of death. After each tragedy I recognised recognised recognised recognized the warning and repented; repented and begged; begged like a coward, begged like a dog; and not in the interest of those poor people who had been extinguished for my sake, but only in my own own own oown own interest. It seems selfish, when I look back on it now. My repentances were very real, very earnest; and after each tragedy they happened every night for a long time. But as a rule they could not stand the daylight. They faded out and shredded away and disappeared in the glad splendor of the sun. They were the creatures of of ◇ of canceled character partly formed of fear and darkness, and they could not live out of their own place. The day gave me cheer and peace, and at night I repented again. In all my boyhood boyhood boyhood boyhood life I am not sure that I ever tried to lead a better life in the daytime—or wanted to. In my age I should never think of wishing to do such a thing. But in my age, as in my youth, night brings me many a deep remorse. I realise realise realise realize that from the cradle up I have been like the rest of the race—never quite sane in the night. When “Injun Joe” diedUsed in “Tom Sawyer.” died* footnote: ¶ *Used in “Tom Sawyer.” died. died* footnote: ¶ *Used in “Tom Sawyer.” revised in pencil died.* footnote: ¶ *Used in “Tom Sawyer.” . . . . But never mind: in an earlier an earlier an earlier an earlier another another chapter I have already described what a raging raging raging raging hell of repentance I passed through then. I believe that for months I was as pure as the driven snow. After dark. dark. dark. centered “Jim Wolf and the Cats.” dark. centered “Jim Wolf and the Cats.” deleted in pencil dark. It was back in those far-distant days—1848 or ’9—that Jim Wolf came to us. He was from 1849 1849 not in 1849. inserted and boxed in the margin in blue pencil by SLC, deleted in pencil by Munro Shelbyville, from Shelbyville, from from Shelbyville, from Shelbyville, a hamlet thirty or forty miles back in the country, and he brought all his native sweetnesses and gentlenesses and simplicities with him. He was approaching seventeen, a grave and slender lad, trustful, honest, honorable, a creature to love and cling to. And he was incredibly bashful. He was with us a good while, but he could never conquer that peculiarity; he could not be at ease in the presence of any woman, not even in my good and gentle mother’s; and as to speaking to any girl, it was wholly impossible. He sat perfectly still, one day—there were ladies chatting in the room—while a wasp up his leg stabbed him cruelly a dozen times; and all the sign he gave was a slight wince for each stab, and the tear of torture in his eye. He was too bashful to move. He . . . stabbed . . . move. He . . . stablbed . . . move. He . . . stabbed . . . move. deleted in blue pencil not in It is to this kind that untoward things happen. My sister gave a “candy-pull” on a winter’s night. I was too young to be of the company, and Jim was too diffident. I was sent up to bed early, and Jim followed of his own motion. His room was in the new part of the house, and his window looked out on the roof of roof of roof roof of the L annex. That roof was six inches deep in snow, and the snow had an ice-crust upon it which was as slick as glass. Out of the comb of the roof projected a short short short short chimney, a common resort for sentimental cats on moonlight moonlight moonlights moonlight nights—and this was a moonlight night. Down at the eaves, below the chimney, a canopy of dead vines spread away to some posts, making a cosy cosy cosy cozy shelter, and after an hour or two the rollicking crowd of young ladies and gentlemen grouped themselves in its shade, with their saucers of liquid and piping-hot candy disposed about them on the frozen ground to cool. There was joyous chaffing and joking and laughter—peal upon peal of it. About this time a couple of old disreputable tom-cats got up on the chimney and started a heated argument about something; also about this time I gave up trying to get to sleep, and went visiting to Jim’s room. He was awake awake awaken awake and fuming about the cats and their intolerable yowling. I asked him, mockingly, why he didn’t climb out and drive them away. He was nettled, and said over-boldly that for two cents he would would would wwould first ‘w’ of ‘wwould’ canceled by Harvey and then by SLC; ‘would’ underscored by SLC . It was a rash remark, and was probably repented of before it was fairly out of his mouth. But it was too late—he was committed. I knew him; and I knew he would rather break his neck than back down, if I egged him on judiciously. “Oh, of course you would! Who’s doubting it?” It galled him, and he burst out, with sharp irritation— “Maybe you you you yyou first ‘y’ of ‘yyou’ canceled; ‘you’ underscored doubt it!” “I? Oh, no, I shouldn’t think of such a thing. You are always always w always always doing wonderful things. With your mouth.” He was in a passion, now. He snatched on snatched on snatched-on snatched on his yarn socks and began to raise the window, saying in a voice unsteady unsteady trembling quivering quivering unsteady revised in blue pencil unsteady with anger— “You You You YYou first ‘Y’ of ‘YYou’ canceled; ‘You’ underscored think I dasn’t—you you you yyou first ‘y’ of ‘yyou’ canceled; ‘you’ underscored do! Think what you blame please—I I I II first ‘I’ of ‘II’ canceled; ‘I’ underscored don’t care what you think. I’ll show you!” The window made him rage; it wouldn’t stay up. I said— “Never mind, I’ll I’ll I’ll I”’ll hold it.” Indeed, I would have done anything to help. I was only a boy, and was already in a radiant heaven of anticipation. He climbed carefully out, clung to the window-sill until his feet were safely placed, then began to pick his perilous way on all fours along the glassy comb, a foot and a hand on each side of it. I believe I enjoy it now as much as I did then; then; then; then: yet yet yet jyet it it it it is near fifty near fifty near fifty near a good deal over fifty or ‘near’ deleted by Harvey, who also began, but did not complete, an insertion; ‘a good deal over’ inserted by SLC in blue pencil a good deal over fifty years ago. The frosty breeze flapped his short shirt about his lean legs; the crystal roof shone like polished marble in the intense glory of the moon; the unconscious cats sat erect upon the chimney, alertly alertly alertly alertly watching each other, lashing their tails tails tails, tails and pouring out their hollow grievances; and slowly and cautiously Jim crept on, flapping as he went, the gay and frolicsome frolicsome rollicking frolicsome frolicsome young creatures creatures creatures creatures under the vine-canopy unaware, and outraging these solemnities with their misplaced laughter. Every time Jim slipped I had a hope; but always on he crept and disappointed it. At last he was within reaching distance. He paused, raised himself carefully up, measured his distance deliberately, then made a frantic grab at the nearest cat—and missed. missed. missed it. missed. it. missed. Of course he lost his balance. His heels flew up, he struck on his back, and like a rocket he darted down the roof feet first, crashed through the dead vines and landed in a sitting posture in fourteen saucers of red-hot candy, in the midst of all that party—and dressed as he he he hhe first ‘h’ of ‘hhe’ canceled in pencil by Harvey; ‘he’ underscored by Harvey and in blue pencil by SLC was: this lad who could not look a girl in the face with his clothes on. There was a wild scramble and a storm of shrieks, and Jim fled up the stairs, stairs, stairs, with the stairs, dripping broken crockery all the way. The incident was ended. But I was not done with it yet, though I supposed I was. Eighteen or twenty years later I arrived in New York from California, and by that time I had failed in all my other undertakings and had stumbled into literature without intending it. This was early in 1867. 1867 1867 not in 1867. inserted and boxed in the margin in blue pencil (1867.) inset I was offered a large sum to write something for the Sunday Mercury, Sunday Mercury, Sunday Mercury, “Sunday Mercury,” underscore of ‘Sunday Mercury’ canceled “Sunday Mercury,” and I answered with the tale of “Jim Wolf and the Cats.” I also collected the money for it—twenty-five dollars. It seemed over-pay, but I did not say anything about that, for I was not so so as so so scrupulous then as I am now. A year or two later “Jim Wolf and the Cats” appeared in a Tennessee paper in a new dress—as to spelling; it was masquerading in a Southern dialect. it was masquerading in a Southern dialect. spelling borrowed from Artemus Ward. it was masquerading in a Southern dialect. MS revised after TS Jean was typed spelling borrowed from Artemus Ward. The appropriator appropriator appropriator proprietor appropriator revised in pencil of the tale had a wide reputation in the West, and was exceedingly popular. Deservedly so, I think. He wrote some of the breeziest and funniest things I have ever read, and did his work with distinguished ease and fluency. His name has passed out of my memory. A couple of years went by; then the original story—my own version— story—my own version— story story—my own version— inserted in blue pencil story—my own version— cropped up again and went floating around in the original spelling, and with my name to it. Soon first one paper and then another fell upon me vigorously for “stealing” Jim Wolf and the Cats from the Tennessee Tennessee Tennessee Tennesse man. I got a merciless basting, but I did not mind it. It’s all in the game. Besides, I had learned, a good while before that, that it is not wise to keep the fire fire fires fires fire going under a slander unless you can get some large advantage out of keeping it alive. Few slanders can stand the wear of silence. But I was not done with Jim and the Cats yet. In 1873 I was lecturing 1873 1873 not in 1873 inserted and boxed in the margin in blue pencil (1873.) inset in London in London in London in London, in the Queen’s Concert Rooms, Hanover Square, and living living living I was living was living at the Langham hotel hotel hotel Hotel ‘H’ typed over ‘h’ Hotel , Portland Place. I had no domestic household on that side of the water, household on that side of the water, household on that side of the water, MS revised after TS Jean was typed household and no official household except George Dolby, lecture-agent, and Charles Warren Stoddard, the Californian Californian Californian California poet, now (1900) Professor 1900 1900 not in 1900 inserted and boxed in the margin in blue pencil (1900.) inset of English literature in the Roman Catholic University, Washington. Ostensibly Stoddard Stoddard he Stoddard Stoddard was my private secretary; in reality he was merely my comrade—I hired him him him merely him in order to have his company. As secretary there was nothing for him to do except to scrap-book the daily reports of the great trial of the Tichborne Claimant for perjury. But he made a sufficient job out of that, for the reports filled six columns a day and he usually postponed the scrap-booking until Sunday Sunday Sunday sSunday ; then he had forty-two forty-two 42 42 36 36 Munro calculated that Stoddard could not have clipped forty-two columns, since the court did not convene on Sundays; the alteration is deemed an unnecessary refinement columns to cut out and paste in— in— in.— in— a proper labor for Hercules. He did his work well, but if he had been older and feebler it would have killed him once a week. Without doubt he does his literary lectures well, but also without doubt he prepares them fifteen minutes before he is due on his platform and thus gets into the the to the the m a freshness and sparkle which they might lack if they underwent the staling process of over-study over-study over-study overstudy . He was good company when he was awake. He was refined, sensitive, charming, charming, charming, charming, gentle, generous, honest himself and unsuspicious of other people’s honesty, and I think he was the purest male I have known, in mind and speech. George Dolby was something of a contrast to him, but the two were very friendly and sociable together, very friendly and sociable together, lovingcontentedcomrades, very friendly and sociable together, very friendly and sociable together, nevertheless. Dolby was large and ruddy, full of life and strength and spirits, a tireless and energetic talker, and always overflowing with good-nature and bursting with jollity. It was a choice and satisfactory menagerie, this pensive pensive gentle, pensive pensive poet and this gladsome gladsome happy gladsome gladsome gorilla. An indelicate story was a sharp distress to Stoddard; Dolby Dolby Doollby Dolby told him twenty-five a day. day. day. It is was rich reward to him to hear Stoddard say, appealingly, “Oh, Dolby! oh, Dolby!” then he would loosen the wall-paper with the hurricane of his laughter. day. Dolby Dolby He Dolby Dolby always came home with us after the lecture, and entertained Stoddard till midnight. Me too. After he left, he left, that, he left, he left, I walked the floor and talked, and Stoddard went to sleep on the sofa. I hired him for company. Dolby had been agent for concerts, and theatres, and Charles Dickens and all sorts of shows and “attractions” for many years; years; years, years,; comma mended to a semicolon years; he had known the human being in many aspects aspects aspects aspects , and he didn’t much believe in him. But the poet did. The waifs and estrays found a friend in Stoddard; Stoddard; Stoddard; Stoddard: Dolby tried to persuade him that he was dispensing his charities unworthily, but he was never able to succeed. One night a young American American American n American got access to Stoddard at the Concert Rooms and told him a moving tale. He said he was living living lviving corrected miswriting living on the Surrey Surrey Surrey sSurrey side, and for some strange reason his remittances had failed to arrive from home; he had no money, he was out of employment, and friendless; his girl-wife and his new baby were actually suffering for food; for the love of heaven could he lend him a sovereign until his remittances should resume? Stoddard was deeply touched touched touched toucdhed , and gave him a sovereign on my account. Dolby scoffed, but Stoddard stood his ground. Each told me his story later in the evening, and I backed Stoddard’s judgment. Dolby said we were women in disguise, and not a sane kind of women, either. The ¶ The no ¶ The ¶ The inserted in blue pencil ¶ The next week the young man came again. His wife was ill with the pleurisy, the baby had the botts, botts, botts, botts, bots fbots bots or something, I am not sure of the name of the disease disease disease deisease ; the doctor and the drugs had eaten up the money, the poor little family were were were was starving. If Stoddard, Stoddard, Stooddard, Stoddard, Stoddard “in “in “in “in the kindness of his heart could only spare him another sovereign,” etc., etc. etc. etc. etc. Stoddard was much moved, and spared him a sovereign for me. Dolby was outraged. He spoke up and said to the customer— “Now Now Now Now, Now, young man, you are going to the hotel with us and state your case to the other member of the family. If you don’t make him believe believe believe believe in you I shan’t shan’t shan’t sha’n’t honor this poet’s drafts in your interest any longer, for I don’t believe in you myself.” The young man was quite willing. I found found found him found no fault in him. On the contrary contrary contrary contrary, I believed in him at once, and was solicitous to heal the wounds inflicted by Dolby’s too frank incredulity; therefore I did everything I could think of to cheer him up and entertain him and make him feel at home and comfortable. I spun many yarns; among others the tale of Jim Wolf and the Cats. Learning that he had done something in a small way in literature, I offered to try to find a market for him in that line. His face lighted joyfully at that, and he said that if I could only sell a small manuscript to Tom Hood’s Annual Annual annual Annual ‘A’ typed over ‘a’; letter underscored three times to capitalize Annual for him it would be the happiest event event da event event of his sad life and he would hold me in grateful remembrance always. That was a most pleasant night for three of us, but Dolby was disgusted and sarcastic. Next week the baby died. Meantime I had spoken to Tom Hood and gained his sympathy. The young man had sent his manuscript to him, and the very day the child died the money for the manuscript the manuscript it the MS. the M.S. the MS. came—three guineas. The young man came with a poor little strip of crape around his arm and thanked with . . . strip . . . thanked to thank with . . . rag strip . . . thanked with . . . strip . . . thanked me, and said that nothing could have been more timely than that money, and that his poor little wife was grateful beyond words for the service I had rendered. He wept, and in fact Stoddard and I wept with him, which was but natural. Also Dolby wept. At least he wiped his eyes and wrung out his handkerchief, and sobbed stertorously stertorously brutally sterterously sterterously stertorously and made other exaggerated shows shows shows shows written above overtyped ‘signs shows’ of grief. Stoddard and I were ashamed of Dolby, and tried to make the young man understand understand understand understnaand that he he Dolby he he meant no harm, it was only his way. The young man said sadly that he was not minding it, his grief grief d grief grief was too deep for other hurts; that he was only thinking of the funeral, and the heavy expenses which which which whidch — We cut that short and told him not to trouble about it, it, that, it, it, leave it all to us; send the bills to Mr. Dolby and— “Yes,” said Dolby, with a mock a mock quite a humane a mock a mock tremor in his voice, “send them to me, and I will pay them. What, are you going? You must not go alone in your worn and broken condition; Mr. Stoddard and I will go with you. Come, Stoddard. Stoddard. Stoddard.” Stoddard. We will comfort the bereaved mamma mamma mother mamma mamma and get a lock of the baby’s hair.” It was shocking. We were ashamed of him again, and said so. But he was not disturbed. He said— “Oh, I know this kind, the woods woods worods woods are full of them. I’ll make this offer: if he will show me his family I will give him twenty pounds. Come!” The Come!” ¶ The Come!” ¶ The Come!” no ¶ The young man said he would not remain to be insulted; and he said good-night and took his hat. But Dolby said he would go with him, and stay by him until he found the family. Stoddard went along to soothe the young man and modify Dolby. They They They They drove across the river and all over Southwark, but did not find the family. At last the young man confessed that there wasn’t any. The thing he sold to Tom Hood’s Annual for three guineas was “Jim Wolf and the Cats.” And he did not put my name to it. So that small tale was sold three times. I am I am I am I am typed ‘Iam’; space added in pencil selling it again again again again , now. It is one of the best properties I have come across.