6 October 1908 Dictated at Stormfield, October 6 October 6 Oct. 6th , 1908 I called this house Innocence at Home but my daughter Clara has abolished that name and replaced it with Stormfield. Stormfield. Stormfield. This is well enough. This is well, well, well, enough, and is satisfactory to me; me; me; for the whole strain of furnishing innocence enough to justify the other name was falling upon me, me, me, and was already beginning to tax me beyond my strength. The house stands high and lonely and exposed to all the winds that blow; consequently Stormfield is a rational name for it; besides, besides, besides, the loggia and the the the apartment over it, it, it, which is Clara’s, Clara’s, Clara’s was not to have been built until next year or the year after, after, after, for economic reasons; but reasons; but reasons;. Bbut period mended to a semicolon when we found we could add it at once at once without delay and at once without expense, expense, expense, we added it. It cost us nothing because I got all of all of all of the necessary money for it for it for it out of a small manuscript which had lain in my pigeon-holes pigeon-holes pigeon-holes forty-one years, years, years, and which I sold to Harper’s Magazine Harper’s Magazine Harper’s Magazine . The article was entitled “Captain “Captain “Captain Stormfield’s Visit to Heaven.” Heaven.” Heaven.” So I think that on the whole Stormfield is a more logical and more justifiable name than the other one. Lately Stormfield has distinguished itself by getting broken into by burglars. It seems strange to me that a New York architect should have overlooked so glaring a necessity as a burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm for so isolated a house as this is, is, is., when I reflect when I reflect But I have when I reflected that New York is only an hour and a half away; away; away; semicolon mended to a colon that it contains four millions of people, people, people, and that the most of them are burglars. It would not have occurred to me to employ a dog, dog, dog, because a dog barks; he barks at anything and everything that comes along, along, along, and therefore is a nuisance; of course he he then he would bark at a a the a burglar, and burglar, and burglar., and I would rather have the burglar. The house was entered at half past twelve, twelve, twelve, midnight, midnight, midnight, eighteen days ago. There were two burglars and they entered by the cellar door and came up to the dining room dining room diningroom on the ground floor. Nobody sleeps on that floor, all the household sleep on the second floor. The burglars made a good deal of noise, noise, noise, but disturbed the sleep of no one but Miss Lyon my secretary. She went down stairs down stairs downstairs and discovered the burglars and shouted for the butler; butler; butler; who came the burglars burglars burglars disappeared at once through the dining room dining room diningroom door, door, door, which they had opened for their convenience. They had already carried away some silver to the entrance gate, gate, gate, and had come back for the rest. Here we have the whole reason for a burglar alarm: alarm: alarm;: the whole function of a burglar alarm is to alarm burglars. It does it. it. alarm him. it. The moment the burglar the burglar the burglar hears it begin to buzz he drops everything and flies. There was never yet a burglar who would remain after the alarm began its office, office, office, and there was never a burglar who would enter a house which he knew possessed an alarm. We are having an alarm put in now. A little late, but worth while. A little late, but worth while. A little late, but worth while. Miss Lyon telephoned Mr. Lounsbury, Lounsbury, Lounsbury, our nearest neighbor; he neighbor; he neighbor;. Hhe period mended to a semicolon telephoned telephoned telephoned to Deputy-Sheriff Banks, Banks, Banks, who lives six miles away, away, away, and by a trifle after one o’clock both were here and ready for business. They set out upon the trail of the burglars, burglars, burglars, accompanied by Mr. Wark and the butler— butler— butler— typed hyphen retraced to make a dash a trail easy to follow by help of a lantern, lantern, lantern, because the dust was deep in the road and the burglars kept to the road instead of breaking for the woods. Following a trail by lantern light is slow work; it led the searchers a plodding and weary a plodding and weary a plodding and weary six miles, miles, miles, to a railway station. Presently a train came along and the searchers and the burglars boarded it simultaneously, the burglars from the one side, side, side, the searchers from the other. It was an accommodation train that carries almost exclusively people with whose faces the conductor is familiar. The Sheriff asked the conductor if he had any strangers aboard. He said he had only two, two, two, and pointed them out. The pair sat together, together, together, with a small hand-bag between them— them— them— typed hyphen retraced to make a dash a hand-bag with our silver in it, it, it, as it happened. When a highwayman accosts you in the way of business he says, says, says, “hold “hold “hold up your hands!” hands!” hands!” but when Sheriff Banks accosted this couple he changed that, that, that, and said “hold “hold “hold up your feet!” feet!” feet,!” for he wanted to see if their unimmortal soles corresponded to the footprints footprints foot-prints he had been following. His remark was quite enough for the burglars, burglars, burglars, and they made a spring for freedom. A scuffle followed, followed, followed, in which one burglar fought his way to the rear of the car and jumped from the moving train unhurt by the pistol-shots pistol-shots pistol shots which Mr. Wark sent after him; him; him.; period mended to a semicolon meantime the meantime the meantime Tthe Sheriff had the other burglar down on the floor, floor, floor, and he secured him at cost of getting a bullet in his thigh thigh side thigh and another one in the rest of his leg. An hour later the escaped burglar was captured. Both are in jail now, now, now, awaiting trial. All the silver they had taken was in that hand-bag, hand-bag, hand-bag, and therefore we got it back. They had taken double as much plated ware; but they were old and experienced experienced competent experienced New York cracksmen, cracksmen, cracksmen, and as soon as dawn enabled them to examine it they recognized recognized recognised its character and hid it in the grass by the roadside, roadside, roadside, where it was found ten days later. I suppose one ought to feel sorry for these men, men, men, for they must spend about fifteen years in a penitentiary for their adventure yet they got nothing at all for the trouble they took. But I will reserve my compassion, compassion, compassion, because certain aspects of this case have changed my mind about burglary, and have brought me to consider it a very high crime, crime, crime, even when the burglar the burglar they burglar inflicts inflicts inflict’s bodily harm upon no one when committing it. In the course of thirty-five years of experience as a householder I have been visited in the night several times by burglars. They took whatever was handy and went away without disturbing us, us, us, and and and so we were unaware unaware unaware, until morning, that anything had happened— happened— happened— typed hyphen retraced to make a dash in all but one instance— instance— instance— typed hyphen retraced to make a dash until the next morning; morning; morning; and so the impression left behind them was not discomforting. No one No one No-one in the house house household was in the least degree disturbed by the incident. the incident. it. the incident. I think, think, think, now, now, now, the saving thing was that they made no alarming noise. The present case was different. The heedless creatures woke up Miss Lyon, Lyon, Lyon, and she woke up the whole household except me. That was eighteen days ago, ago, ago, and I am the only member of the household that has had any valuable sleep since. Clara fled to New York, finding she could get no sleep here; Miss Lyon’s nights are mainly sleepless; four days ago the butler gave up trying to sleep, sleep, sleep, and took his departure; the cook and the the the maids handed in their resignations the next day; yesterday one of the maids who has been with us four years, years, years, and was expecting to remain with us forty, forty, forty, resigned her position and told me that since the burglary she never gets more than three hours of sleep at one stretch, and whether whether if whether the stretch be short or long she wakes out of it with a shriek and sits up in bed delivering cold perspiration from every pore— pore— pore— typed hyphen retraced to make a dash and always because of one and the same dream, dream, dream, repeated and repeated over and over again night after night, night, night, in which dream the burglars are always shooting her to death and she feels the bullets go through her. Since the burglary I have conversed with many persons who have had personal experience of burglaries, burglaries, burglaries, and I find that when the burglar makes a noise and frightens the women-folk women-folk women-folk of the household it takes those women years to get over the effects of it. For many months their sleep, sleep, sleep, when they get any, any, any, is filled with horrors, horrors, horrors, and their lives are made miserable. As I have already said, said, said, this new light makes burglary, to me, a particularly high crime— crime— crime— typed hyphen retraced to make a dash a much higher crime than it would be if the burglar had killed the the that the sufferer; for death is much better than a life filled with terror. And so, so, so, if I were privileged to alter the law, law, law, I would make make make ‖ make the penalty penalty pnalty light for noiseless burglary, burglary, burglary, and remorselessly remorselessly I would remorselessly hang the burglar who disturbed the peace of the family. A couple of days after the burglary I put a notice on the front door. By the letters which are arriving now, now, now, I find that it has traveled through the European newspapers, newspapers, newspapers, and as it had already traveled traveled traveled through the American ones I think that most of the burglars of this world have read it and will see the wisdom of allowing themselves to be guided by it. NOTICE. To the next Burglar. There is nothing but plated ware in this house, now and henceforth. You will find it in that brass thing in the dining room dining room diningroom over in the corner by the basket of kittens. If you want the basket, put the kittens in the brass thing. Do not make a noise— noise— noise— typed hyphen retraced to make a dash it disturbs the family. You will find rubbers in the front hall, by that thing which has the umbrellas in it, chiffonier, I think they call it, or pergola, or something like that. Please close the door Please close the door Please close the door SLC underscored ‘PLEASE CLOSE THE DOOR’ and wrote in the margin, ‘R Plain Roman lower-case italics no emphasis needed.’ when you go away. away. away:. Very truly yours, S. L. Clemens.