12 February 1907 Tuesday, February 12, 1907 Tuesday, February 12, 1907 Tuesday, Dictated Feb. 12, 1907. dictated Tuesday, Feb. 12, 1907. [Dictated Tuesday, February 12, 1907.] Member of the tariff-revision commission brings message to Mr. Clemens from Emperor Wilhelm in regard to the dinner described in former chapter. row of 11 stars row of 25 ellipses; but the ensuing text calls for ‘stars’ row of 9 stars Those stars indicate the long chapter which I dictated yesterday, a chapter which is much too long for magazine purposes, and therefore must wait until this Autobiography shall appear in book form, five years hence, when I am dead: five years according to my calculation, twenty-seven years according to the prediction furnished me a week ago by the latest and most confident of all the palmists who have ever read my future in my hand. The Emperor’s Emperor’s emperor’s Emperor’s dinner, and its beer-and-anecdote appendix, covered six hours of diligent industry, and this accounts for the extraordinary length of that chapter. A couple of days ago a gentleman called upon me with a message. He had just arrived from Berlin, where he has has has had been acting for our Government in a matter concerning tariff-revision tariff-revision tariff-revision tariff revision , he being a member of the commission appointed by our Government to conduct our share of the affair. Upon the completion of the commission’s labors, the Emperor Emperor emperor Emperor invited the members of it it the Commission it it to an audience, and in the course of the conversation he made in the course of the conversation he made began the audience with in the course of the conversation he made in the course of the conversation he made a reference to me; continuing, he spoke of my chapter on the German language in “A Tramp Abroad,” and characterized it by an adjective which is too complimentary for me to repeat here without bringing my modesty under suspicion. Then he paid some compliments to “The Innocents Abroad,” and followed these with the remark that my account in one of my books of certain striking phases of German student life was the best and truest that had ever been written. By this I perceive that he remembers that dinner of sixteen years ago, for he said the same thing to me about the student-chapter at that time. Next he said he wished this gentleman to convey two messages to America from him and deliver them—one to the President, the other to me. The wording of the message to me was: Convey to Mr. Clemens my kindest regards. Ask him if he remembers that dinner, and ask him why he didn’t do any talking. Convey . . . talking. Convey . . . talking. “Convey . . . talking.” “Convey . . . talking.” Why, Why, Why, Why, how could I talk when he was talking? He “held the age,” “held the age,” “held the age,” “held the age,” as the poker-clergy say, and two can’t talk at the same time time time, time with good effect. It reminds me of the man who was reproached by a friend, who said, “I think it a shame that you have not spoken to your wife for fifteen years. How do you explain it? How do you justify it?” it?” it? it?” That poor man said, “I didn’t want to interrupt her.” If the Emperor Emperor emperor Emperor had been at my table, he would not have suffered from my silence, he would only have suffered from the sorrows of his own solitude. If I were not too old to travel I would go to Berlin and introduce the etiquette of my own table, which tallies with the etiquette observable at other royal tables. I would say, “Invite me again, your your Yyour your Majesty, and give me a chance;” chance;” chance;” chance”; then I would courteously courteously gladly courteously courteously waive rank and do all the talking myself. I thank his Majesty for his kind message, and am proud to have it and glad to express my sincere reciprocation of its sentiments. I thank . . . sincere . . . its sentiments. I thank . . . very sincere . . . its sentiments. I thank . . . sincere . . . its sentiments. I thank . . . sincere . . . its sentiments.