5 October 1907 Dictated October October Oct. 5, 1907 Mr. Robert Porter’s visit to Mr. Clemens, in Tuxedo; also Francesca’s and Dorothy’s—Copy of one of Dorothy’s stories—an Indian tale. Robert Porter arrived from England England England, and Oxford Oxford Oxford, a week or ten days ago, in the first trip of that wonderful ship which all the nations and all the newspapers have been admiring and talking about ever since—the Lusitania Lusitania Lusitania . Mr. Porter was my host during those days that I spent in Oxford. He is of the staff of the London Times, and has come over here on a special mission for that paper. He came out to Tuxedo for a day or two, and among other matters of interest he told us of his ingenious invention whereby he communicates with his family daily, by cable, without expense: whenever his wife and daughter take up the Times at breakfast, in Oxford, they eagerly seek the American cables and run their eyes down the column, paying no attention to any of its contents except the scattered names of our public men. The moment they light upon one of those names their interest is intensely concentrated there, and upon the word which precedes the name and the word which follows it; these two are always adjectives, and hidden in their insides is Porter’s private and confidential message to the wife and daughter. Necessarily, the name which Mr. Porter has occasion to use oftenest oftenest most frequently oftenest is the President’s; that name’s attendant adjectives convey messages of affection, condition of health, and various other matters of a family nature—consequently the President’s name appears in the cables with a good deal of frequency. The adjectives that precede and follow the names of our other public men convey information of other sorts to the Oxford household. Just as Mr. Porter was leaving Oxford a near neighbor, who is a friend of his family and is also an acquaintance of mine, ran over and gave him an errand to do for her in New York. She dearly hoped he could accomplish it for her, but she had her doubts. In any case, she wanted to be relieved of the misery of suspense as soon as possible, so she begged him to write her the result with all possible dispatch dispatch despatch . Mr. Porter said, “I’ll cable it.” “Oh by no means,” exclaimed the lady, in whose mind cabling is associated with ruinous expense, and so so so she was aghast at the idea, idea, idea—, no matter whom the cost might fall upon. “Yes,” said Porter, “I’ll cable it. You must not be kept waiting. It is too important for that; I will cable it at the expense of the Times.” The lady was distressed at such an idea, and also surprised. She said gravely, “But will that be honest?” “Oh no,” said Porter, “but that is no matter. The Times will never find it out.” When Mr. Porter arrived in New York he carried the lady’s affair through successfully, the first day. He wanted to send the good news at once, but in order to do it he was obliged to have the use of Mr. Bryan’s name, and he couldn’t get it, for the reason that the unexpected and the almost impossible happened: Bryan was quiet during two whole days, consequently there was no way to utilize him in a cablegram; but on the third day the permanent candidate for the Presidency Presidency presidency did something, or said something, and at breakfast the next morning his his Bryan’s his name appeared in a cablegram in the Times in a sentence beginning “The irrepressible Bryan.” That was the desired adjective, and Mrs. Porter at once telephoned that waiting lady, saying “The cablegram has come, and everything is as you wanted it.” When the Lusitania Lusitania Lusitania was half way half way half-way across the Atlantic, Mr. Porter, assisted by the ship’s engineers, made some nice and carefully worked-out calculations; then based some predictions upon the calculations and sent the predictions by wireless to the London Times and the New York World—to wit, that the new ship’s average speed on the voyage would be twenty-three knots and two-tenths per hour, and that she would make the run to New York in so many days and so many hours—I have forgotten the precise details. The prediction as to knots was only a tenth of a knot out of the way a tenth of a knot out of the way a tenth of a knot out of the way ‘a tenth of a knot out of the way’ underscored , if my memory is right, if my memory is right, if my memory is right, and the prediction as to the length of the voyage missed the precisely correct figure precisely correct figure fact precisely correct figure by only six minutes! six minutes! six minutes.! ‘six minutes’ underscored; period mended to an exclamation point Prophecy has not arrived at this exactness before, I judge, either in ancient times or modern. Francesca and her mother arrived from England ten days ago, and spent a couple of days with us. Ten days earlier Dorothy, my latest little shipmate, arrived here and we had her delightful society during seven days and nights. She is just eleven years old, and seems to be made of watch-springs and happiness. The child was never still a moment, when she wasn’t asleep, and she lit up this place like the sun. It was a tremendous week, and an uninterruptedly joyful one for us all. After she was gone, and silence and solitude had resumed their sway, we felt as if we had been through a storm in heaven. Dorothy is possessed with the idea of becoming a writer of literature, and particularly of romance, and it was a precious privilege to me to egg her on, and beguile her into working her imagination. She was intensely in earnest. I was her amanuensis; she did the dictating. I never betrayed myself with a laugh, but the strain which I had to put upon every muscle and nerve and tendon in me, to keep from breaking out, almost made a physical wreck of me sometimes. She is swift with the pen, she is hampered by no hesitations when she is dictating, and she is even a more desperate speller than ever Susy was. We began our mornings early—as early as half past half past half-past eight— eight— eight,— and from that time until nine in the evening there were no breaks in our industries. I say our industries because I always assisted her in them until I broke down at noon; then Miss Lyon stood a watch till about three; then I resumed my watch. In order to save myself from perishing, I usually persuaded Dorothy to devote this half-afternoon watch to literature. By grace of this subterfuge, I was enabled to lie down and perform; I lay on one lounge on the back porch and she on another one at my side; then she dictated her stories glibly, and I set them down. When a story was finished I dictated it back back back to her from my manuscript, and she wrote it down. I got around telling her why I observed this practice; I didn’t want her to know my reason, which was that I wanted the tale in her own brisk and tumultuous handwriting, adorned with her own punctuation—I mean the absence of it—and steeped in the charm of her incomparable spelling. Her tales were of a highly romantic order, and she chose highly romantic scenes and episodes for them; but at that point romance usually took a rest; it didn’t extend itself to the names of her characters; any any any ‘any’ underscored sort of name would answer for her heroes heroes heroes —and five times in six they bore names of so plebeian and flat and pulpy flat and pulpy commonplace flat and pulpy a sort as to almost disqualify those persons from doing heroic things. But to me those forlorn names were golden, and I wouldn’t have traded them for the most high-sounding ones in the world’s romantic literature. One day she dictated an Indian romance, and I set it down. The little rascal was all innocence and candor, and was seldom suspicious, but it cost me many lies to keep her so, because every now and then as the sentences fell felicitously from her lips they hit me hard, and my suppressed laughter made my body shake; and when she detected that, I could notice a vague suspicion in her voice when she would ask what was the matter with me. The answer which came nearest to satisfying her was that I was feeling a little chilly; but that had also another effect, which was not a happy one for me, for it aroused her affectionate solicitude and she would not rest until I had taken some whisky to keep me from catching cold. Before we got through with the brief Indian tale—which I am going to insert here just as she wrote it, just as she spelled it, just as she punctuated it—the loving little creature had inflicted so many whiskies on me that my efficiency as an amanuensis was a little damaged and rickety; and if the tale had gone on a little longer I should have been incapable. in the very Depts Depts dDepts of the forest the day was a sultry day and Henry Potter was tiered of hunting when suddenly a wild war hoop sounded very near him great heavens it’s the Idains what can I do the hoop was comming nearer and nearer I must run for my life now he thought but then yes I must oh what can I do—the hoop was almost upon him now and from the other direction was comming another hoop good heavens it must be a band there is no chance I must hide in that hollow tree the indains indains indains by this time were there they at once began to camp then one of the Idains said we must have some wood for our fire there is a good tree there he pointed to the one where Henry was Hiding the men of the tribe began to approch approch approach the tree with tomahaks one of the Idains saw the hollow in the tree and said oh there must be an annimal in that tree I will get that for my supper Henry was thinking a nice supper you’ll have out of me and even in all the danger that was around him he could not help smailing the Idains Idains Idainxs split the hole in the the mthe tree wider and when Henry saw his eye he knew no more — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — when he awoke he was in a large tent the tent of the chife who was glaring down upon him I wish I could make you see that tent with all the grim old warriors in thier coustansCostumes. coustans* footnote: *Costumes. coustans*1 footnote: *1.Costumes. ranged about thier chief eager to see what was to be done with this new captive— captive— captive-— he will be burned cried some others he will be stoned with a lot of other opinons—at last the chief said put him under gaurd for tonight tomorrow we will decide what to do with him. Henry saw an indain girl in the ranks of women start and look toward him—then he was led away it was about 11 oclock that night when a gentle footstep came lightly into the tent then said a voice he thought thought thought he knew come with me at once who are you asked Henry I am Margearet oh Margearet cried Henry Margearet was a girl who had dissepered from the seltemet 2 years ago she was dressed as an Indain girl and was tanedTanned. taned† footnote: †Tanned. taned*2 footnote: 2. Tanned. she and Henry loved each other and were to be married she said we have no time for talking now come Henry followed her and she led him safely to the edge of the forest where they lived happily ever afterwards. Dorothy Dorothy After this she Dorothy reeled off this masterful tale just as she has punctuated it—without a pause anywhere, and just as if Henry’s adventures were passing before her eyes at the moment moment moment, and she was simply setting them down according to the the the facts. I was glad when “Margearet” got her young man safely out to the edge of the forest where they lived happily ever afterwards—without the formality of a marriage—for I thought for a moment that she was going to furnish the pair a family without any superfluous preliminaries and I would get another whisky-drench by consequence.