28 March 1906 Wednesday, March 28, 1906 Orion Clemens’s personality—His adventure at the house of Dr. Meredith—His three three 3 o’clock a.m. call on young lady—Death of Mr. Clemens’s father, just after having been made County Judge— Mr. Clemens’s small income after having become bankrupt through maladministration of Charles L. Webster. My brother’s experience was another conspicuous example of my scheme’s efficiency. I will talk about that by and by. But for the moment my interest suddenly centres centres centers itself upon his personality, moved thereto by this passing mention of him—and so I will drop other matters and sketch that personality. It is a very curious one. In all my seventy years I have not met the twin of it. Orion Orion Orion Dictated (insert the date.) Orion insertion by SLC, in pencil; Munro canceled ‘(insert the date.)’ and wrote ‘March 28, 1906.’ in the top margin of the galley proof [Dictated March 28, 1906.] Orion Clemens was born in Jamestown, Fentress County, County, County, County, Tennessee, in 1825. 1825 1825 (1825) typed in the margin (1825.) inset He was the family’s first-born, and antedated me ten years. Between him and me came a sister, Margaret, who died, aged ten, in 1837 in 1837 1837 (1837) typed in the margin (1837.) inset that village of Florida, Missouri, where I was born; and Pamela, mother of Samuel E. Moffett, who was an invalid all her life and died in the neighborhood of New York a year ago, aged about seventy-five, after experimenting with every malady known to the human race and with every medicine and method of healing known to that race, and enjoying each malady in its turn and each medicine and each healing method, with an enthusiasm known only to persons with a passion for novelties. seventy-five, after . . . novelties. seventy-five, after . . . novelties. ‘after . . . novelties’ queried by an unidentified person, possibly Munro, on TS2 to suggest omission seventy-five., after . . . novelties. revised in pencil seventy-five. 1843 1843 (1843) typed in the margin (1843.) inset Her character was without blemish, and she was of a most kindly and gentle disposition. Her . . . disposition. not in Her . . . disposition. Her . . . disposition. Also there was a brother, Benjamin, who died in 1843 aged ten or twelve. Orion’s boyhood was spent in that wee little log hamlet of Jamestown up there among the “knobs”—so called—of east Tennessee, among a very sparse population of primitives who were as ignorant of the outside world and as unconscious of it as were the other wild animals that inhabited the forest around. “knobs”—so called—of east Tennessee, among . . . around. knobs—so called —of East Tennessee, so-called, among . . . around. “knobs”—so called—of East Tennessee,. among . . . around. “knobs”—so called—of East Tennessee. The family migrated to Florida, Missouri, then moved to Hannibal, Missouri, when Orion was twelve and a half twelve and a half twelve-and-a-half twelve and a half years old. When he was fifteen or sixteen he was sent to St. Louis and there he learned the printer’s trade. One of his characteristics was eagerness. He woke with an eagerness about some matter or other every morning; it consumed him all day; it perished in the night and he was on fire with a fresh new interest next morning before he could get his clothes on. He exploited in this way three hundred and sixty-five red hot red hot red hot red-hot new eagernesses every year of his life—until he died sitting at a table with a pen in his hand, in the early morning, jotting down the conflagration for that day and preparing to enjoy the fire and smoke of it until night should extinguish it. He was then seventy-two years old. life . . . old. life—until . . . old. life.—until . . . old. life. But I am forgetting another characteristic, a very pronounced one. That was his deep glooms, his despondencies, his despairs; these had had must have had had their place in each and every day along with the eagernesses. Thus his day was divided—no, not divided, mottled—from sunrise to midnight with alternating brilliant sunshine and black cloud. Every day he was the most joyous and hopeful man that ever was, I think, and also every day he was the most miserable man that ever was. While he was in his apprenticeship in St. Louis, he got well acquainted with Edward Bates, who was afterwards afterwards after-wards afterwards in Mr. Lincoln’s first cabinet. Bates was a very fine man, an honorable and upright man, and a distinguished lawyer. He patiently allowed Orion to bring to him each new project; he discussed it with him him Orion him him and extinguished it by argument and irresistible logic—at first. But after a few weeks he found that this labor was not necessary; that he could leave the new project alone and it would extinguish itself the same night. Orion thought he would like to become a lawyer. Mr. Bates encouraged him, and he studied law nearly a week, then of course laid it aside aside aside for the present aside to try something new. He wanted to become an orator. Mr. Bates gave him lessons. Mr. Bates walked the floor reading from an English book aloud and rapidly turning the English into French, and he recommended this exercise to Orion. But as Orion knew no French, he took up that study and wrought at it like a volcano for like a volcano for with enthusiasm with enthusiasm like a volcano for like a volcano for two or three days; days; days,; comma mended to a semicolon days; then gave it up. During his apprenticeship in St. Louis he joined a number of churches, one after another, and taught in their their the their their Sunday-schools—changing his Sunday-school every time he changed his religion. He was correspondingly erratic in his politics—Whig to-day, Democrat next week, and anything fresh that he could find in the political market the week after. I may remark here that throughout his long life he was always trading religions and enjoying the change of scenery. I will also remark that his sincerity was never doubted; his truthfulness was never doubted; and in matters of business and money his honesty was never questioned. Notwithstanding his forever-recurring forever-recurring forever-recurring forever-recurring caprices and changes, his principles were high, always high, and absolutely unshakable. He was the strangest compound that ever got mixed in a human mould mould mould mould . Such a person as that is given to acting upon impulse and without reflection; that was Orion’s way. Everything he did he did with conviction and enthusiasm and with a vainglorious pride in the thing he was doing—and no matter what that thing was, whether good, bad, bad, bad, bad or indifferent, he repented of it every time in sackcloth and ashes before twenty-four hours had sped. Pessimists are born, not made. Optimists are born, not made. But I think he was the only person I have ever known in whom pessimism and optimism were lodged in exactly equal proportions. Except Except Except Except revised in pencil in the matter of grounded principle, he was as unstable as water. You could dash his spirits with a single word; you could raise them into the sky again with another one. You could break his heart with a word of disapproval; you could make him as happy as an angel with a word of approval. And there was no occasion to put any sense or any vestige of mentality of any kind into these miracles; anything you might say would answer. He had another conspicuous characteristic, and it was the father of those which I have just spoken of. This was an intense lust lust longing lust lust for approval. He was so eager to be approved, so girlishly anxious to be approved by anybody and everybody, without discrimination, that he was commonly ready to forsake his notions, opinions and convictions at a moment’s notice in order to get the approval of any person who disagreed with them. I wish to be understood as reserving his fundamental fundamental fundamental fundamental principles all the time. He never forsook those to please anybody. Born and reared among slaves and slave-holders slave-holders slave-holders slave-holders slaveholders , he was yet an abolitionist from his boyhood to his death. He was always truthful; he was always sincere; he was always honest and honorable. But in light matters—matters of small consequence, like religion and politics and such things—he never acquired a conviction that could survive a disapproving remark from a cat. He was always dreaming; he was a dreamer from birth, and this characteristic got him into trouble now and then. Once no ¶ Once no ¶ Once ¶ Once when he was twenty-three or twenty-four years old, and was become a journeyman, he conceived the romantic idea of coming to Hannibal without giving us notice, in order that he might furnish to the family a pleasant surprise. If he had given notice, he would have been informed that we had changed our residence and that that gruff old bass-voiced bass-voiced bases-voiced bass-voiced sailor-man sailor-man sailor man sailorman , Dr. Meredith, Meredith, Meredith, Meredith, G., G., our family physician, was living in the house which we had formerly occupied and that Orion’s former room in that house was now occupied by Dr. Meredith’s two ripe old-maid Meredith’s two ripe old-maid Meredith’s two ripe old-maid Meredith’s two ripe old-maid G.’s two middle-aged maiden G.’s two middle-aged maiden sisters. Orion arrived at Hannibal per steamboat in the middle of the night, and started with his customary eagerness on his excursion, his mind all on fire with his romantic project and building and enjoying his surprise in advance. He was always enjoying things in advance; it was the make of him. He never could wait for the event, but must must he must he must must build it out of dream-stuff dream-stuff dream-stuff dream-stuff and enjoy it beforehand—consequently sometimes when the event happened he saw that it was not as good as the one he had invented in his imagination, and so he had lost profit by not keeping the imaginary one and letting the reality go. When he arrived at the house he went around to the back door and slipped off his boots and crept up stairs and crept up stairs and crept up stairs and crept up stairs and crept up-stairs and arrived at the room of those old maids old maids old- maids old maids elderly ladies elderly ladies without having wakened any any any of the any sleepers. He undressed in the dark and got into bed and snuggled up against somebody. bed and snuggled up against somebody. bed. and snuggled up against somebody. bed and snuggled up against somebody. He was a little surprised, but not much—for he thought it was our brother Ben. It was winter, and the bed was comfortable, and the supposed the supposed the supposed the supposed Ben added to the comfort—and so he was dropping off to sleep very well satisfied with his progress so far and full of happy dreams of what was going to happen in the morning. But something else was going to happen sooner than that, and it happened now. The old maid old maid old-maid old maid maid that was being crowded squirmed squirmed squirmed squirmed fumed and fretted fumed and fretted and struggled and presently came to a half waking to a half waking to a half waking to a half-waking revised in pencil to a half-waking condition and protested against the crowding. That voice paralysed paralysed paralyzed Orion. He couldn’t move a limb; he couldn’t get his breath; and the crowded one began to paw around, found Orion’s began to paw around, found Orion’s began to paw around, found Orion’s began to paw around, found Orion’s discovered his discovered his new whiskers and screamed “Why it’s a man!” screamed “Why it’s a man!” screamed “Why it’s a man!” began to scream.ed “Why it’s a man!” began to scream. This removed the paralysis, and Orion was out of the bed the bed the bed bed and clawing around around around round in the dark for his clothes in a fraction of a second. Both maids began to scream, then, scream, then, scream, scream, then, scream, then, so Orion did not wait to get his whole wardrobe. wardrobe. outfit. outfit. wardrobe. wardrobe. He started with such parts of it as he could grab. He flew to the head of the stairs and started down, and was was he was he was revised in pencil was paralysed paralysed paralyzed again at that point, because he saw the faint yellow flame of a candle soaring up the stairs from below and he judged that Dr. Meredith Meredith Meredith Meredith G. G. was behind it, and he was. was. was. He was behind it. was. He had no clothes on to speak of, but no matter, he was well enough fixed for an occasion like this, because he had a butcher-knife in his hand. Orion shouted to him, him, him, him, and this this this this saved his life, for the Doctor recognized his voice. Then in those deep-sea-going bass bass bases bass tones of his that I used to admire so much when I was a little boy, he explained to Orion the change that had been made, told him where to find the Clemens Clemens Clemens Clemens family, and closed with some quite unnecessary advice about posting himself before he undertook another adventure like that—advice which Orion probably never needed again as long as he lived. One bitter December night bitter December night night during that wintry visit night during that/a wintry visit Munro wrote an ‘a’ above ‘that’; this suggested change was adopted in NAR 10pf bitter December night during a wintry visit revised in pencil bitter December night , Orion sat up reading until three o’clock in the morning and then, then, then then, then, without looking at a clock, sallied forth to call on a young lady. He hammered and hammered at the door; couldn’t get any response; didn’t understand it. Anybody else would have regarded that as an indication of some kind or other and would have drawn inferences and gone gone would have gone gone home. But Orion didn’t draw inferences, he merely hammered and hammered, and finally the father of the girl girl girl girls appeared at the door in a dressing-gown. He had a candle in his hand and the dressing-gown was all the clothing he had on—except an expression of unwelcome which was so thick and so large that it extended all down his front all down his front all down his front all down his front to his instep and nearly obliterated the dressing-gown. But Orion didn’t notice that this was an unpleasant expression. He merely walked in. The old gentleman took him into the parlor, set the candle on a table, and stood. Orion made the usual remarks about the weather, and sat down—sat down and talked and talked and went on talking—that old man looking at him vindictively and waiting for his chance—waiting treacherously and malignantly for his chance. Orion had not asked for the young lady. It was not customary. It was understood that a young fellow came to see the girl of the house, not the founder of it. At last Orion got up and made some remark to the effect that probably the young lady was busy and he would go now and call again. That was the old man’s chance, and he said with fervency “Why good God, God, God, God, land, land, aren’t you going to stop to breakfast?” When my father died, in 1847, the disaster happened—as is the customary way with such things—just 1847 1847 (1847) typed in the margin at the very moment when our fortunes had changed and and and when we were about to be comfortable once more, after several years of grinding poverty and privation which had been inflicted upon us by the dishonest act of one Ira Stout, to whom my father had lent several thousand dollars—a fortune in those days and in that region. My father had just been elected County Judge. This modest prosperity was not only quite sufficient for us and for our ambitions, but he was so esteemed—held in such high regard and honor throughout the county— county— county— that his occupancy of that dignified office would, in the opinion of everybody, be his possession as long as he might live. He went to Palmyra Palmyra Palmiyra , the county-seat county-seat County- seat , to be sworn in, about the end of February. In returning home, horseback, twelve miles, a storm of sleet and rain assailed him and he arrived at the house in a half frozen condition. Pleurisy followed and he died on the 24th of March. Thus our splendid new fortune was snatched from us and we were in the depths of poverty again. It is the way such things are accustomed to happen. When I became a bankrupt through the ignorance and maladministration of Charles L. Webster, after having been robbed of a hundred and seventy thousand dollars by James W. PaigeInventor of a type-setting machine of a most ingenious and marvelous character. There is but one; it is in Cornell University: preserved as a curiosity. It is all of that. + ftnt by James W. Paige* footnote: *Inventor . . . that. by James W. Paige* footnote: *Inventor . . . that. during the seven immediately preceding years, we went to Europe in order to be able to live on what was left of our income, and it was sufficiently slender. During the succeeding ten or twelve years it was often as low as twelve thousand a year, and at no time did it reach above twenty thousand a year, I think. I am sure it did not reach above twelve thousand until two years before we returned from Europe, in October October October 1900. 1900 1900 (1900) typed in the margin Then it improved considerably, but it was too late to be of much service to Mrs. Clemens. She had endured the economies of that long stretch of years without a single murmur, and now when fortune turned in our favor it was too late. She was stricken down, and after twenty-two months of suffering she died. In Florence, Italy, June 5, 1904. In Florence, Italy, June 5, 1904. In Florence, Italy, June 5, 1904. As I have said, the Clemens family was penniless. Orion came to the rescue.