2 October 1907 Dictated October October Oct. 2, 1907 The journey to Liverpool with Tay Pay, and the Lord Mayor’s banquet in the evening—Copy of the speech by Tay Pay, and extract from Mr. Clemens’s reply to it. My industries in England began at Tilbury, with the reporters at eight in the morning on the 18th of June, and continued without a break until midnight, the 10th of July. Ashcroft’s note: To Liverpool with Tay Pay. Banquet in the Town Hall in the evening. Tay Pay is Irish for T. P., and is a pet name familiar to the British nation; it is short for T. P. O’Connor, M.P. He is a gifted and charming Irishman, and has for many years represented Liverpool in the House of Commons, and is likely to continue to represent it while he lives. He had been invited by the Lord Mayor to introduce me, and we made the trip together—in quite unusual comfort, too, for his lordship had secured from the railway company railway company Railway Company for my use in going and returning the special car which it has provided for the Prince of Wales. I had not seen so satisfactory a car before, and am not likely to see its like again. It had one sumptuous bed-chamber bed-chamber bed-chamber , and another bed-chamber bed-chamber bedchamber less sumptuous—the latter for servants, and beyond it a place for baggage; it also had a parlor and a dining room dining room dining-room . We reached Liverpool a little after four in the afternoon, and I rested in bed until it was time to go to the banquet. The Lord Mayor was admirably hospitable; he sent his state carriage for me, with a most gorgeously clad captain and crew, consisting of coachman and footmen; and he received me at the municipal municipal sumptuous municipal palace in his state costume, with his sword at his side and his cocked hat in his hand. I like these large attentions. I like these large attentions. I like these large attentions. The banquet was just over when he conducted me into the banqueting hall banqueting hall banqueting-hall , so the speech-making began at once. After the usual toasts to the King and the President, and the reading of the usual letters and telegrams, the rest of the business of the evening was proceeded with. I copy from the newspaper: The Lord Mayor said that before calling on Mr. T. P. O’Connor to propose the toast of “Our Guest Guest QGuest Guest ” he would like, on their own behalf and on behalf of all citizens of Liverpool, to offer a most hearty welcome to Dr. Clemens Clemens Clements Clemens , the guest of the evening evening evening (loud applause) evening . Liverpool highly appreciated the honour which Dr. Clemens Clemens Clements Clemens had done it in accepting his (the Lord Mayor’s) invitation to meet such a body of Liverpool citizens as he had the pleasure of seeing around him that evening. There was no man in the world to-day speaking the English tongue who had brought so much mirth and happiness to the citizens of this Empire and of the United States. That would be a red letter day in the annals of Liverpool Liverpool Liverpool (hear, hear) Liverpool . Mark Twain had, he thought, made his year of office to some extent famous, and he hoped that he might be remembered as being the Lord Mayor of Liverpool in Mark Twain’s year year year (laughter and applause) year . The popular Tay Pay was received with enthusiasm when he rose. I will copy his speech here, because it is full of compliments for me and I shall want to read it over now and then. He said: Our [¶] Our no ¶ [¶] Our friend has a name, name, name, a little name (laughter). It is name, our pet name, our family name for him name for him name, so to speak of for him (hear, hear) name for him . I will speak of him as Mark Twain Twain Twain (applause) Twain . This is the manner in which we address him in our thoughts and private words. I feel it is a great honour to have to propose, in one of England’s greatest cities, the toast of the most honoured and respected guest that England has had for many a year. Our guest of this evening has received a welcome of which an Emperor might be proud, and which I do not think any Emperor we know will be likely to receive receive receive (laughter) receive . We honour him in the first place as a great man of letters letters letters (hear, hear) letters . As a humourist he was known to the world many a day ago. His humour, when it first burst upon the horizon of literature, occasioned in this country, above all, the feeling that there was something new and original, and for a long time most people in this country would have thought of Mark Twain simply as a writer of our language who language who language, who language, who told the stories which gave everybody hours of happiness and mirth. But, as I ventured to say when writing about him some time ago, Mark Twain has come to his own, Mark Twain has come to his own, centered MARK TWAIN HAS COME TO HIS OWN, Mark Twain has come to his own, and people have recognised that what first appeared to be merely the exuberant humour of a great new country, and, to a certain extent, of a new literature, was destined to become one of the classics the classics theclassics the classics of the great English language, which is the heritage alike of America and England. It was, perhaps, a surprise to some, as time went on, to find that underneath the wild and exuberant gaiety of his early works our friend Mark Twain had always a serious and earnest purpose purpose purpose (hear, hear) purpose . Sometimes in the midst of what appeared to be the very recklessness of his fun you come across in his books some passage of serious purpose and sometimes of tragic earnestness. We know that one of the reasons why he holds so high a place in our esteem and affection is that he is a man who has always fought for the right and always hated the wrong wrong wrong (applause) wrong . Within the last two or three years he has dealt stern and sturdy blows at the sordid superstition of Christian Science Science Science (hear, hear) Science , and at the gross cruelty of a man who does not deserve the name of King.Leopold of Belgium. King.* footnote: *Leopold of Belgium. King (applause).* footnote: *Leopold of Belgium. King.* footnote: *Leopold of Belgium. In a speech which I heard him make at a banquet in London he uttered something approaching to an apology for the humour of his works. I will not say he deemed it necessary to explain—because no explanation was necessary necessary necessary (hear, hear) necessary —that a man may have a serious purpose and yet speak the language of laughter and cheerfulness. I don’t know whether I will be right in laying it down as a theory of literature that while the authors of tragedies and melodramas are respected by mankind, it is the great humorist that is really loved by mankind mankind mankind (applause) mankind . It is not because laughter is such such shch such a relief to a great deal of the necessary sombreness of life that the humorist is so loved, but it is because the man with the gift of humour has always the great gift of a sane and healthy point of view of human life life life (hear, hear) life . I have no patience with those decadents who see nothing in life but its squalid side, its impure side, and its ignoble side side side (hear, hear) side . Men of that kind may be described as the Jack-the-Rippers of literature. Jack-the-Rippers of literature. centered JACK-THE-RIPPERS OF LITERATURE. (laughter). Jack-the-Rippers of literature. Their influence was demoralising and bad, not teaching men the great lesson that the improvement of man’s estate is illimitable, and that in any case it is our duty to live our lives in the best way we can, and to help future generations to higher and better things. I don’t know of any writer who has has had hads preached the gospel of true, sincere, and genuine optimism better than our guest of this evening evening evening (applause) evening . If you were to ask me what has struck me as the most striking quality of Dr. Clemens as a man of letters, I would say it was his originality. There never was a Mark Twain before him, and there never will be again again again (hear, hear) again . He stands unique in the absolute originality of his genius originality of his genius centered ORIGINALITY OF HIS GENIUS originality of his genius and writings. The second quality which is eminently his is his Americanism. I have read a good deal about one of the greatest of Americans—Abraham Lincoln—and the eulogy that was the highest, and best, and shortest is contained in the poem of James Russell Lowell in which he speaks of Abraham Lincoln as the first American in the fullest sense of the word that had occupied the chair of President. As Lincoln came fresh and, as it were, bleeding from the soil, so Dr. Clemens came from the very roots of American life and experience. Beginning in the home of a lawyer, with a brother a journalist, he started in the the what I the the State of California California alifornia California when that was in its teething stage. He has been a lecturer, traveller, publisher, inventor, and he has even been a financier financier financier (laughter) financier . Cardinal Richelieu would not have been flattered if he had been told that he was one of the greatest statesmen of the world, but to insert in an obscure poet’s corner one of his extremely bad poems he would have regarded as recognising his true genius. In the same way, if I could state that Mark Twain is as big a financier as his friend Mr. Rogers, of the Standard Oil, he would regard it as a compliment. However, I am not in a position to do that, nor, I believe, is Mr. Clemens Clemens Clements Clemens himself. There was in his career an episode which has especially appealed appealed apealed appealed to us, and was in some respects like an episode in the life of one of the heroes and martyrs of our literary history—I mean Sir Walter Scott. Sir Walter Scott became a member of of f of a great publishing firm. So did Dr. Clemens some years ago, when he So did Dr. Clemens some years ago, when he He He So did Dr. Clemens some years ago, when he was making a large income in what I in what I in what I in what I may be excused in calling one of the finest of human pursuits—that of a journalist journalist journalist (laughter and applause) journalist . At an early age he started as a compositor, and in his teens he was an acting editor, and I believe there was a large accession of libel suits during that period period period (laughter) period . From that he went to the broad Mississippi, that great inland sea, and learned the work of pilot. Then he went to the West and became a mining prospector and pioneer. Walter Scott Walter Scott He was in the great State of Nevada in its infancy, and in the from literature, but he Walter Scott Walter Scott thought with Richelieu and Mark Twain that his true mission was publishing. Face to face with the dark spectre of ruin, he set to work and managed to rescue some of his fortune, but he died in his work. Our friend Dr. Clemens has had a similar experience, but with the tough and unconquerable energy tough and unconquerable energy centered TOUGH AND UNCONQUERABLE ENERGY tough and unconquerable energy of his race he successfully successfully not in successfully faced the situation. He travelled all over the world. Thousands of people were only too glad to help him, but he relied only on his own energy, his own unimpeachable integrity of purpose, and at the end of three years of hard drudgery, lecturing in all parts of the world, he was able to say that he was a free man, owing not a penny, owing not a penny, not in owing not a penny, and to give an example of a man of courage and energy and honesty in the face of calamity calamity calamity (loud applause) calamity . But, gentlemen, when he travelled down the Mississippi, when he went from one town to another all through America, from office to office; when he saw the mines in Nevada and California, he was going through that great university of life which has made him the great man of letters he is to-day to-day to-day (applause) to-day . And when he went down to Oxford I think there was a great meeting—I think I may say a great reconciliation— a great reconciliation— centered A GREAT RECONCILIATION a great reconciliation— between two things which are apparently opposite. We all know and love Oxford, the greatest sanctuary and treasure-house of tradition and classical learning of many epochs in British history— history— history (applause)— history— the representative and symbol of all that is old-world in tradition and history. And when that old-world University held out its hand and gave its highest honour to this man representing a new land, modern traditions, an entirely unique genius untrammelled by the traditions of the old, I say that was a great reconciliation which marked not only an epoch in the life of Dr. Clemens Clemens Clements Clemens , but of Oxford itself itself itself (loud applause) itself . Finally, we welcome him as an American who has tried many trades. But there is one he has avoided—I don’t know why he avoided it, or whether I ought to congratulate or condole with him—he has never been a politician. never been a politician. centered NEVER BEEN A POLITICIAN [¶] (laughter and applause). never been a politician. And why has he never been a politician? Because he occupies the higher and greater position of ambassador—an ambassador plenipotentiary plenipotentiary plenipotentary plenipotentiary in his omnipotence over our hearts and minds minds minds (applause) minds . A diplomatist cannot enter into the passing ferocities of party warfare. He represents something higher and better than one party in one State. He represents all that seeks for the peace and goodwill among all parties in all States States States (applause) States . And to-night we welcome him as a great American working for this goodwill between his own race and the races of all mankind mankind mankind (applause) mankind . Therefore, I ask you to charge your glasses and wish many years of life to to on to on to our friend—the glory of his own country and the delight of every other country country country (loud applause) country . In reply, I did what I seldom do—made a long speech. I did not mean to do it, but was incautious and heedless, and the time slipped by without my noticing it. I will copy only the close of it: I I I . . . I don’t think I will say anything about the relations of amity relations of amity centered RELATIONS OF AMITY relations of amity existing between our two countries. It is not necessary, it seems to me. The ties between the two nations are so strong that I do not think we need trouble ourselves about their their them themir being broken broken broken (applause) broken . Anyhow, I am quite sure that in my time, and in yours, my Lord Mayor, those ties will hold good, and, please God, they always will will will (applause) will . English blood is in our veins, we have a common language, a common religion, a common system of morals, and great commercial interests to hold us together together together (hear, hear) together . Home is dear to us all, and now I am departing to my own home beyond the ocean. Oxford has conferred upon me the loftiest honour loftiest honour loft iesthonour loftiest honour that has ever fallen to my share of this world’s good things things things (applause) things . It is the very one I would have chosen as outranking any and all others, the one more precious to me than than of than than any and all others within the gift of man or State State State (applause) State . During my four weeks sojourn here I have had another lofty honour, a continuous honour, an honour which has flowed serenely along, without obstruction, through all these twenty-six days, a most moving and pulse-stirring pulse-stirring pulse-stirring pulse-stirring honour—the heartfelt grip of the hand, and the welcome that does not descend from the pale pale pale, pale grey matter of the brain, but rushes up with the red blood from the heart! from the heart! of the heart (applause). of from the heart.! period mended to an exclamation point It makes me proud It makes me proud centered IT MAKES ME PROUD It makes me proud and it makes me humble, too too too (hear, hear) too . Many and many a year ago I read an anecdote in Dana’s “Two Years Before the Mast Mast Hearth queried by Ashcroft in margin: ‘Mast?’ Mast .” It was like this. There was a presumptuous little self-important man in a coasting sloop engaged in the dried apple and kitchen furniture trade, and he was always hailing every ship that came in sight. He did it just to hear himself talk and to air his small grandeur. One day a majestic Indiaman came ploughing by with course on course of canvas towering into the sky, her decks and yards swarming with sailors, bearing a rich freight of precious spices, lading the breezes with gracious and mysterious odours of the Orient Orient Oriental.. Orient . It was a noble spectacle, and, of course, the little skipper popped into the shrouds shrouds shrouds shrouds and squeaked out a hail—“Ship ahoy! What ship is that? And whence and whither?” In a deep and thunderous bass bass voice bass bass the answer came through the speaking trumpet—“The Begum of Bengal—123 days out from Canton—homeward bound! Canton—homeward bound! Canton.—homeward bound! Canton—homeward bound! What ship is that?” Well, it just crushed that poor little creature’s vanity vanity vanity (laughter) vanity , and he squeaked back most humbly “Only the Mary Ann, fourteen hours hours days days hours out from Boston— Boston— Boston— Boston— with nothing to speak of.” of.” of” (laughter). of.” Oh, what an eloquent word that “only” to express the depth of his humbleness humbleness humbleness (laughter) humbleness ! That is just my case. Just one hour, perhaps, in the twenty-four—not more—I pause and reflect, and then I am humble. Then I am properly meek, and for a little while I am only the only the only the only Mary Ann, fourteen hours out, cargoed with vegetables and tinware; but during all the other twenty-three hours my vain self-complacency rides high, and then I am a stately Indiaman, ploughing the great seas under a cloud of canvas and laden with the kindest kindest finest kindest kindest words that have ever been spoken to any wandering alien in this world, and then my twenty-six happy days seem to be multiplied by five, and I am the Begum of Bengal, 123 days out—and (a sigh) homeward bound! bound! bound (long applause). bound.! period mended to an exclamation point After the banquet there was a reception in one of the great salons, and there I talked with several hundred ladies and gentlemen, as many as twenty-five of whom I had seen in Liverpool before, without suspecting it—thirty-five years before. It was when I had once lectured there. Several of the twenty-five were able to quote remarks from that lecture—a very good feat of memory. I returned to London on the 11th, and after some final dissipations on the 12th sailed from Tilbury on the morning of the 13th—homeward bound. I believe that those four weeks in England were the delightfulest of my life.