[A Group of Servants] [A Group of Servants] title [A Group of Servants] not in * * * June 4, Kaltenleutgeben. * * * June 4, Kaltenleutgeben. Mond Tuesday. x x x May 4 June 4, Kaltenleutgeben. In this family we are four. When a family has been used to a group of servants whose several terms of service with it cover these periods, to wit to wit to-wit : 10 years, 12 years, 13 years, 17 years, 19 years, and 22 years, it it it finds itself in a is not able to understand the new ways of a new group straight off. That would be the case at home; abroad it is the case emphasized. We have been housekeeping a fortnight, a fortnight, a week, a fortnight, now—long enough to have learned how to pronounce the servants’ names, but not to spell them. We shan’t ever learn to spell them; they were invented in Hungary and Poland, and on paper they look like the alphabet out on a drunk. There are four: two maids, a cook, and a middle-aged woman who comes once or twice a day to help around generally. They are are are are corrected miswriting good-natured and friendly, and capable and willing. Their Their Their ways are not the ways which we have been so long used to with the home tribe in America America America, but they are agreeable, and no fault is to be found with them except in one or two particulars. The cook is a love, but she talks at a gait and with a joyous interest and energy which make everything buzz. She is always excited; gets excited over big and little things alike, for she has no sense of proportion. Whether the project in hand is a barbecued bull a barbecued bull ostrich eggs a barbecued bull or a hand-made hand-made hand-made cutlet it is no matter, she loses her mind; she unlimbers her tongue, and while her breath holds out you can’t tell her from a field day in the Austrian Parliament. But what of it, as long as she can cook? And she can do that. She has has is has that mysterious mysterious rare and mysterious art which is so rare in the world—the art of making everything taste good which comes under the enchantment of her hand. She is the kind of cook that establishes confidence with the first meal; establishes it so thoroughly that after that you do not care to know the materials of the dishes nor their names: that her hall-mark is upon them is sufficient. The youngest of the two maids, Charlotte, Charlotte, Charlotte (which is not her name), deleted in pencil is about twenty; strong, handsome, capable, intelligent, self-contained, quiet—in fact, rather reserved. She has character, and dignity. The other maid, Wuthering Heights (which is not her name), is about forty and looks considerably younger. She is quick, smart, active, energetic, breezy, good-natured, has a high-keyed high-keyed high-pitched keyed voice and a loud one, talks thirteen to the dozen, talks all the time, talks in her sleep, will talk when she is dead; is here, there, and everywhere all at the same time, and is consumingly interested in every every every thin every devilish thing that is going on. Particularly if it is not her affair. And she is not merely passively interested, but takes a hand; and not only takes a hand but the principal one; in fact will play the whole game, fight the whole battle herself, if you don’t find some way to turn her flank. But as she does it in the family’s interest, not her own, I find myself diffident about finding fault. Not so the family. It gravels the family. I like that. Not maliciously, but because it spices the monotony to see the family graveled. Sometimes they are driven to a point where they are sure they cannot endure endure stand endure her any longer, and they rise in revolt; but I stand between her and harm, for I adore Wuthering Heights. She is not a trouble to me, she freshens up my life, she keeps me interested all the time. She is not monotonous, she does not stale, she is fruitful of surprises, she is always breaking out in a new place. The family are always training her, always caulking her, but it does not make me uneasy any more, now, for I know that as fast as they stop one leak she will spring another. Her talk is my circus, my menagerie, my fireworks, my spiritual refreshment. When she is at it I would rather be there than at a fire. She talks but little to me, for I understand only about half that she says, and I have had the sagacity not to betray that that to her that I understand that half. But I open my door when she is talking to the Executive at the other end of the house, and then I hear everything, and and and ◇ the enjoyment is without alloy, for it is like being at a show on a free ticket. She makes the Executive’s head ache. I am sorry for that, of course; still it is a thing which cannot be helped. We must take things as we find them in this world. The Executive’s efforts to reconstruct Wuthering Heights are marked by wisdom, patience and gentle and persuasive speech. They will succeed, yet, and it is a pity. This morning at half past eight I was lying in my bed counterfeiting sleep; the Executive was lying in hers, reasoning with Wuthering Heights, who had had was had just brought the hot water and was buzzing around here and there and yonder preparing the baths and putting all manner of things to rights with her lightning touch, and accompanying herself with a torrent of talk, cramped down to a low-voiced flutter flutter textual note: On the verso of MS page 7, which ends with this word, SLC wrote and deleted ‘re-born as a microbe’; the page is numbered 30 and was evidently discarded from another MS. to to and clatter to keep from waking me up. “You talk too much, Wuthering Heights, as I have told you so often before. It is your next worst fault, and you ought to try your best to break yourself of it. I—” “Ah, indeed yes, gnädige Frau, it is the very truth you are speaking, none knows it better than I nor nor or nor revised in pencil is sorrier. Jessus! Jessus! Jessus,! but it is a verdammtes defect, as in your goodness you have said, yourself, these fifty times, and—” “Don’t! I ¶ “Don’t! I ‘¶ “Don’t! □ I symbol for an em-space never use such language—and I don’t like to hear it. It is dreadful. I know that it means nothing with you, and that it is common custom and came to you with your mother’s milk; but it distresses me to hear it, and besides you are always putting it into my mouth, which—” “Oh, bless your kind heart, gnädige Frau, you won’t mind it in the least, after a little; it’s only because it is strange and new to you now, that it isn’t pleasant; pleasant; pleasant; but that will wear off in a little while, and then—oh, it’s just one of those little trifling things that don’t amount to a straw, you know—why, we all swear, the priest and everybody, and it’s nothing, really nothing at all; but I will break myself of it, I will indeed, and this very moment will I begin, for I have lived here and there in my time, and seen things, and learned wisdom, and I know, better than a many another, that there is only one right time to begin a thing, and that is on the spot. Ah yes, by Gott, as your grace yes, by Gott, as your grace indeed, yes, ◇◇ yes, beim lieben Herrgott, as your grace yes, by Gott, as your grace deletion of ‘yes, ◇◇’ in ink, then the rest of the revision in pencil was saying only yesterday—” “There—do be still! It is as much as a person’s life is worth to make even the triflingest remark to you, it brings such a flood. And any And any And Any moment your chatter chatter chatter may wake my husband, and he”—after a little pause, to gather courage for a deliberate mis-statement—“he can’t abide it.” “I will be as the grave! I will, indeed, for sleep is to the tired, sleep is the medicine that heals the weary spirit. Heilige Mutter Gottes! before I—” “Be still!” “Zu befehl. If—” “Still!” After a little pause the Executive began a tactful and low-temperature lecture which had all the ear-marks of preparation about it. I know that easy, impromptu style, style, look, style, and how it is manufactured, for I have worked at that trade myself. I have forgotten to mention that Wuthering Heights has not always served in a subordinate position; she has been housekeeper in a rich family in Vienna for the past ten years; consequently the habit of bossing is still strong upon her, naturally enough. “The cook and Charlotte complain that you interfere in their affairs. It is not right. It is not your place to do that.” “Oh, Joseph and Mary, Deuteronomy and all the saints! Think of that! Why, of course when the mistress is not in the house it is necessary that somebody—” “No, it is not necessary at all. The cook says that the reason the coffee was cold yesterday morning was, that you removed it from the stove, and that when she put it back you you she you removed it again.” “Ah, but what would one do, gnädige Frau? Frau? Frau;? It was all boiling away.” “No matter, it was not your affair. And yesterday morning you would not let Madame Blank into the house, and told her no one was at home. My husband was at home. It was too bad—and she had come all the way from Vienna. Why did you do that?” “Let her in? in? in;? semicolon mended to a question mark —I ask you would I let her in? let her in? do that? let her in? and he hard at his work and not wishing to be disturbed, sunk in his labors up to his eyes and grinding out God knows what, for it is beyond me, though it has my sympathy, and none feels for him more than I do when he is in his lyings-in, lyings-in, convulsions lyings-in, revised in pencil that way—now would I let her in to break up his work in that idle idle idle, idle corrected miswriting way and she with no rational thing with no rational thing no with no rational thing ‘no’ of ‘nothing’ deleted and ‘with no rational’ inserted in the world to pester him about? now could I?” “How do you know what she wanted?” The shot struck in an unprotected place, and made silence for several seconds, for W. H. H. U. was not prepared for it and could not think of an answer right away. Then she recovered herself and said— “Well—well, it was like this. Well, she—of course she could have had something proper and rational on her mind, but then I knew that if that was the case she would write, not come all the way out here from Vienna to—” “Did you know she came from Vienna?” I knew by the silence that another unfortified place had been hit. Then— “Well, I—that is—well, she had that kind of a look which you have noticed upon a person when—when—” “When what?” “She—well, she had that kind of a look, anyway; for—” “How did you know my husband did not want to be disturbed?” “Know it? Oh, indeed, and well I knew it; for he was that busy that the sweat was leaking through the floor, and I said to the cook, said I—” “He didn’t do a stroke of work the whole day, but sat in the balcony smoking and reading.” [In a private tone, tone, tone tone, touched with shame: “reading “reading “reading his own books—he is always doing it.” it.” it.” ] “You should have told him; he would have been very glad to see Madame Blank, and was disappointed when he found out what had happened. He said so, himself.” “Oh, indeed, yes, dear gnädige Frau, he would say it, that he would, but give your heart peace, he is always saying saying th saying things which—why, I was saying to the butcher’s wife no longer ago than day before yesterday—” “Ruhig! ¶ “Ruhig! ¶ “Ru ¶ “Ruhig! and let me go on. You do twice as much of the talking as you allow me to do, and I can’t have it. If—” “It’s Viennese, gnädige Frau. Custom, you see; that’s just it. We all do it; it’s Viennese.” “But I’m not Viennese. And I can’t get reconciled to it. And your interruptions—why, it makes no difference: if I am planning with the cook, or commissioning a dienstman, or asking the postman about the trains, no matter, you break right in, uninvited, and take charge of the whole matter, and—” “Ah, Jessus Jessus Jessas ! it’s just as I was saying, and how true was the word! It’s Viennese—all over, Viennese. Custom, you see—all custom. Sorel Blgwrxczlzbzockowicz—she’s the Princess Tzwzfzhopowic’s maid—she says she always does so, and the Princess likes it, and—” “But I am not the Princess, and I want things my way; can’t you understand a simple thing like that? And there’s another thing. Between the time that the three of us went to Vienna yesterday morning, and ten at night when we returned, you seem to have had your hands over-full over-full over-full . When the cook’s old grandfather came to see her, what did you meddle, for?” for?” textual note: On the verso of MS page 17, which ends with this word, SLC wrote and deleted ‘Mrs.’