11 February 1907 Monday, February 11, 1907 Monday, February 11, 1907 Monday, Feb. 11, 1907. Dictated Monday, Feb. 11, 1907. [Dictated Monday, February 10, 1907.] misdated The Emperor’s dinner in Berlin at which Mr. Clemens is chief guest, and feels that he may have offended the Emperor Emperor emperor by a possible slight breach of royal etiquette—although the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager empress dowager and the reigning Empress Empress empress afterwards invite him to breakfast, etc. Eleven Eleven 11 or twelve twelve 12 years later, at a dinner given by the proprietor of the Staats-Zeitung Staats-Zeitung Staats Zeitung for Prince Henry when he visited this country, Mr. Clemens was not seated at the state table. Two months ago (December 6) Two months ago (December 6) Several weeks ago Two months ago (Dec. 6) Two months ago (December 6) I was dictating a brief account of a private dinner in Berlin, where the Emperor of Germany was host and I the chief guest. Something happened day before yesterday which moves me to take up that matter again. The additions which I shall now make can appear in print after I am dead, but not before. From 1891 until day before yesterday, I had never mentioned them in print, nor set them down with a pen, nor ever referred to them in any way with my mouth—not even to my wife, to whom I was accustomed to tell everything that happened to me. The additions . . . happened to me. The additions . . . happened to me. not in At the dinner his his Hhis his Majesty chatted briskly and entertainingly along in easy and flowing English, and now and then he interrupted himself to address a remark to me, or to some other individual of the guests. When the reply had been delivered, he resumed his talk. I noticed that the table etiquette tallied with that which was the law of my house at home when we had guests: that is to say, the guests answered when the host favored them with a remark, and then quieted down and behaved themselves until they got another chance. If I had been in the Emperor’s Emperor’s emperor’s Emperor’s chair and he in mine, I should have felt infinitely comfortable and at home, and should have done a world of talking, and done it well; but I was guest now, and consequently I I I I felt less at home. From old experience, I was familiar with the rules of the game, and familiar with their exercise from the high place of host; but I was not familiar with the trammeled trammeled trammeled trammelled and less satisfactory position of guest, therefore I felt a little strange strange strange, strange and out of place. But there was no animosity—no, the Emperor Emperor emperor Emperor was host, therefore according to my own rule he had a right to do the talking, and it was my honorable duty to intrude no interruptions or other improvements, except upon invitation; and of course it could be my my my ‘my’ underscored my turn some day: day: day—: day: some day, on some friendly visit of inspection to America, it might be my pleasure and distinction to have him as guest at my table; then I would give him a rest, and a remarkably remarkably not in remarkably quiet time. In one way there was a difference between his table and mine—for instance, atmosphere; the guests stood in awe of him, and naturally they conferred that feeling upon me, for, after all, I am only human, although I regret it. When a guest answered a question he did it with deferential voice and manner; he did not put any emotion into it, and he did not spin it out, but got it out of his system as quickly as he could, and then looked relieved. The Emperor Emperor emperor Emperor was used to this atmosphere, and it did not chill his blood; maybe it was an inspiration to him, for he was alert, brilliant, brilliant, brilliant, brilliant and full of animation; also he was most gracefully and felicitously complimentary to my books,—and I will remark here that the happy phrasing of a compliment is one of the rarest of human gifts, and the happy delivery of it another. In that other chapter I mentioned the high compliment which he paid to the book, but there were others; among them some gratifying gratifying high gratifying gratifying praise of my description in “A Tramp Abroad” of certain striking phases of German student life. I mention these things here because I shall have occasion to hark back to them presently. Fifteen or twenty minutes before the dinner ended the Emperor Emperor emperor made a remark to me in praise of our generous soldier-pensions soldier-pensions soldier-pensions ; then without pausing he continued the remark, not speaking to me but across the table to his brother, Prince Heinrich. The Prince Prince prince replied, endorsing the Emperor’s Emperor’s emperor’s view of the matter. Then I intruded intruded followed with intruded my own view of it. I said that in the beginning our Government’s generosity to the soldier was clean in its intent, and praiseworthy, since the pensions were conferred upon soldiers who had earned them, soldiers who had been disabled in the war and could no longer earn a livelihood for themselves and their families; but that the pensions decreed and added later lacked the virtue of a clean motive, and had little by little degenerated into a wider and wider and more and more offensive system of vote-purchasing vote-purchasing vote-purchasing , and was now become a source of corruption which was an unpleasant thing to contemplate, and was a danger, besides. I think that that was about the substance of my remark; but, in any case, the remark had a quite definite result, and that is the memorable thing about it—manifestly it made everybody uncomfortable. I seemed to perceive this quite plainly. I had committed an indiscretion. Possibly it was in violating etiquette by intruding a remark when I had not been invited to make one; possibly it was in taking issue with an opinion promulgated by his his His Majesty. I do not know which it was, but I quite clearly remember the effect which my act produced, to wit: the Emperor Emperor emperor refrained from addressing any remarks to me afterward; and not merely during the brief remainder of the dinner, but afterward in the kneip-room where beer and cigars and hilarious anecdoting prevailed until about midnight. I am sure that the Emperor’s Emperor’s emperor’s good-night was the only thing he said to me in all that time. Was this lengthy rebuke studied and intentional? I don’t know, but I regarded it in that way. I can’t be absolutely sure of it, because of modifying doubts created afterwards by one or two circumstances. For example: the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager empress dowager invited me to her palace, and the reigning Empress Empress empress invited me to breakfast, and also sent General General for Gen. von Versen to invite me to invite me to invite me to come to her palace and read to her and her ladies from my books. I was not able to do any of these things, because I was ailing, and was soon abed with an inflammation inflammation inflamation of my port lung which kept me there thirty-four days and came exceedingly near to closing my sojourn in this world; so near that when the physicians ordered me to leave Berlin and go to the Riviera I was reluctant to pay my railway fare in advance, because I did not believe I was going to live to finish the trip. I am aware that it would be most unlikely that the Kaiser’s Empress Empress empress would invite to breakfast with her a person who had acquired the Kaiser’s disapproval—most unlikely—perhaps even impossible. All this was in 1891. 1891 1891 (1891) Eleven or twelve years later Prince Heinrich came over and made a brilliant progress through America. At two of the dinners given in his honor, and where I was one of the guests, no speeches were made, but at another one the case was different. 1902 1902 1902 inserted in the margin This was a prodigious banquet given by the wealthy proprietor of the Staats-Zeitung Staats-Zeitung Staats Zeitung to newspaper men of distinction drawn from all large American cities. At that banquet I found myself placed, placed, placed, not at the state table with the other notorieties, as usual, but on the main floor among the human race. My vanity was profoundly hurt. The like of this had not happened to me for thirty-five years. By and by George W. Smalley came over and said to me, “What are you doing here? Why aren’t you up yonder?” I said mournfully, “Because I was not invited.” “You don’t mean it! What ass is engineering this affair?” “I don’t know which one it is, but I think it’s Ridder.” “Oh no, Ridder would know better. It must be the blunder of a subordinate. What toast are you going to respond to?” “None. I have not been invited.” “Oh come!” “No—it is as I say. I have not been invited.” “Do you know, it has an incredible look. There isn’t a man at that state table of any real distinction; they are second-rates and third-rates, every one; they are mere semi-notorieties, evanescents, and of no lasting consequence. Ridder’s understudy Ridder’s understudy Ridder’s understudy seems to have raked the town to find artificial ornaments for his state table. Why have you been left out? How do you account for it?” “Perhaps it’s because I don’t belong in that class. But it is as it should be, Smalley; I shouldn’t shouldn’t shouldn’t not feel at home in that inferior inferior insignificant inferior company.” This was light talk. But at But at But At bottom, my vanity was sharply wounded. I was ashamed to be seen down there among all those common people. They would go back home, all over America, and tell about it, and perhaps think they had found out that I was not as important a personage in New York as the country had been deceived into believing. Midway of the banquet I felt that I could not endure the the this the situation any longer, I must go out and cry. So I got up and walked down the central aisle toward a distant door of refuge, and then a a the a thing happened which filled me with joy, and enabled me to show off—and I would rather show off, any time, than save a human life: a multitude of those journalists rose up and flocked after me and crowded that place of refuge whither I went, and shook hands with me, and praised me, and made me ineffably comfortable and contented, for I knew that in that whole house there wasn’t another person that could call out that demonstration except the chief guest, the Imperial Prince Imperial Prince imperial prince , brother of an emperor! I went back to my humble seat healed, comforted, satisfied, all my bitter venom turned to sugar and molasses. On my way up the aisle the Prince Prince prince discovered me and sent an aide-de-camp to ask me to come up and see him, which I did. He was very cordial, very pleasant, and asked me to come to the withdrawing-room when the banquet should be over, over, over, and have a talk. I did it. But he never mentioned the Emperor Emperor emperor , and didn’t bring any messages. I judged that Ridder’s blasphemous treatment of me was now explained. I judged that originally he must have placed my name among the speakers—he naturally would; that in accordance with royal etiquette the list would have to be submitted to the Prince Prince prince ; that the Prince Prince prince had remembered the crime or crimes which I had committed so long before, in Berlin, and had crossed my name out with his blue-pencil.