6 August 1906 Monday, August 6, 1906 Goes back to the failure of Charles L. Webster and Company—First meeting with H. H. Rogers—His sympathy, and assistance—Mr. Clemens in three years pays off a hundred cents on the dollar. Goes . . . and Company . . . three . . . a hundred . . . dollar. Goes . . . & Co. . . . 3 . . . 100 . . . dollar—Mr. Clemens’s income from his books has been as high as 57,000 a year. Goes . . . & Co. . . . 3 . . . 100 . . . dollar—Mr. Clemens’s income from his books has been as high as 57,000 a year. ‘Mr. Clemens’s . . . a year.’ canceled on the typewriter; ‘Goes . . . dollar—’ canceled by SLC Let Let Let . . . .Let us go back three months, now, and take up—no, let him wait. I could not do him justice this morning, for I feel at peace with all the human race. It is best to wait for a more favorable time. We must not be inadequate with that man—we must boil him in oil. I know I get these soft spells too often, but I was born so—I cannot change my disposition. By my count, estimating from the time when I began these dictations two years ago, in Italy, I have been in the right mood for competently and exhaustively feeding fat my ancient grudges in the cases of only thirteen deserving persons—one woman and twelve men. It makes good reading. Whenever I go back and re-read re-read re-read re-read those little biographies and characterizations it cheers me up, and I feel that I have not lived in vain lived in vain lived in vain de ‘stet’ written in the margin lived in vain . The work was well done. The art of it is masterly. I admire it more and more every time I examine it. I do believe I have flayed and mangled and mutilated those people beyond the dreams of avarice. Those chapters will not see print for fifty or seventy-five years to come—but that is no matter, my matter, my matter,. Mmy ‘M’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ matter, my enjoyment was in the writing of them, not in the unhappiness they could afford to those people or their children. I should like to read them privately to those people, and I shall hope for that opportunity; but opportunity; but opportunity;. Bbut period mended to a semicolon; ‘B’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ opportunity; but their families have done me no harm, and my heirs and assigns must not publish any of those chapters while any of the wives and children are still living. They have my permission to publish them after that. I don’t mind grandchildren and great-grandchildren, and they themselves won’t mind. I did not write those malignant chapters in malice entirely entirely entirely, entirely —a part of my motive was to do those people good. It seemed to me that if I could read the chapters to them privately it would go far to acclimate them for the Hereafter. No, I could not do that man justice this morning. Let him go. I seem to be out of vitriol; vitriol; vitriol.; period mended to a semicolon vitriol; I suppose I have sprung a leak a leak a leak ‘aleak’ marked to insert space a leak somewhere. I seem to be full of peace, affection, and the joy of life. Let us go back to history, and resume where we left off, off, off, off, six or seven weeks ago, with the failure of Charles L. Webster and Company. and Company. & Co. My wife and I realized that we were really ruined this time, and quite completely. In my account, in a previous chapter, account, in a previous chapter, account, in a previous chapter, account, in a previous chapter, of the many fortunes which I had for years been wasting in foolish speculations, I have not intimated that the losses the losses they losses the losses ever seriously seriously seriously seriously embarrassed us, and indeed they did not. But the case was different now. In six or seven years Charles L. Webster and Company and Company and Co. and James W. Paige James W. Paige James W. Paige, James W. Paige the composing-machine adventurer, had between them between them between them between them swallowed up a quarter of a million dollars, half of it mine, half of it my wife’s. The great panic of ’93–’94 of ’93–’94 not in of ’93–’94 was on. Our incomes, like most other people’s, were crippled. were crippled. had stopped. were crippled. were crippled. Moreover, we were under the heavy burden of debt left behind by the dead Webster firm. It was in these black days that I stumbled accidentally upon H. H. Rogers one evening in the lobby of the Murray Hill Hotel, whither Dr. Clarence C. C. C. C. Rice and I had gone on some errand or other, I do not not not not not now remember what. However, Henry Rogers interested himself in my troubles at once, and set himself the task of piloting me out of them. It was not a holiday job, for even a Standard Oil veteran; but veteran; but veteran;. Bbut period mended to a semicolon; ‘B’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ veteran; but his was a cool and capable head, and he was not disturbed by the complications and perplexities that were driving me toward insanity. It cost him several weeks of diligent hard work, work, work, work, and one trip to Chicago, to pull me out of the Paige entanglement and set that matter permanently straight. It cost him five five five five ‘four’ interlined above as an alternate reading, then deleted; query written and deleted in the margin years of intricate and bothersome work to pull me out of the Webster complications and abolish them out of my life for good and all. Personally Personally Personally Personally I never had anything to do with straightening out those involved involved intricate involved involved and vexatious Webster complexities. I sat around idle; idle; idle,; comma mended to a semicolon idle; sometimes here, sometimes with the family in Europe, and latterly decorating the globe’s circumference with a garland of lectures, delivered in the interest of the Webster creditors. lectures, delivered in the interest of the Webster creditors. lectures., delivered in the interest of the Webster creditors. lectures, delivered in the interest of the Webster creditors. He did the whole of it himself. We were not legally liable for much of much of much of much of that great Webster indebtedness, but Mrs. Clemens and I considered ourselves morally liable for the whole of it, liable for the whole of it, liable, for the whole of it, liable for the whole of it, and we believed that if I could have could have should be granted could have could have four years’ time I could earn enough to pay it all off at at , at at a hundred cents on the dollar. I was only fifty-eight; I was in good repair; and we elected to pay a hundred cents. Now I wish to make particular note of this fact: I wish to make particular note of this fact: I wish to make particular note of this fact: I wish to make particular note of this fact: of all our business friends, friends, friends, friends, there was only one one one ‘one’ underscored one who approved the hundred cents proposition, the hundred cents proposition, this— , the hundred cents proposition, the hundred cents proposition, encouraged us in it, and said “Hold your grip and go ahead.” That was Henry Rogers. We We So wWe We held our grip and went ahead. In something short of something short of something short of something short of three years we earned the money— money— money,— money— forwarding it to Mr. Rogers as fast as we acquired it—and then we were out of debt. We had paid a hundred cents on the dollar, and owed no one a penny. penny. penny. [¶] During these last eight years I have been obliged to wince a little, now and then, at banquets, when speakers applauded me for paying a hundred cents when there was no legal occasion for it, and setting me away up alongside the honest great Sir Walter, for I knew that about nine-tenths of that applause belonged properly to Mrs. Clemens and Mr. Rogers. I am a weak sister, and I could probably have been persuaded to let the Webster assets pay what they could of the indebtedness and stop there. But no persuasions could ever have been compiled out of the dictionary that would have moved Mrs. Clemens for a moment to consent to that; and if she had needed any backing to hold her firm to her purpose, there was Mr. Rogers ready to furnish it. not in In the beginning Mrs. Clemens wanted to turn over her house to the creditors— creditors— creditors;— creditors— land, furniture and all—a property which had cost more than a hundred and fifty thousand dollars, and which she had paid for out of her own pocket. She was determined to do this, but Mr. Rogers would not permit it—and of course I wouldn’t. It cost her a pang to relinquish that idea, but she was not able to help herself. I I I think I I have said in a previous chapter that at the meeting of Webster creditors Mr. Rogers insisted on making Mrs. Clemens a preferred creditor, and in giving her my copyrights in satisfaction of an indebtedness of sixty-five thousand dollars dollars dollars cash dollars which she had lent to Webster and Company upon the firm’s notes, from time to time. He He He held his ground and He secured his point, and the copyrights went to Mrs. Clemens. That was the far-sightedest thing thing thing which thing Mr. Rogers has has hads has ever done for me. All values were flat at that time; no kind of property was salable salable saleable ; you couldn’t even even even not in give it away to a really bright and intelligent person. My books were no exception to the rule. They seemed permanently dead. I was not able to regard them as property. But Mr. Rogers stood to it that when the panic should be over they would revive, and would presently furnish a steady income and be as valuable as before. valuable as before. good as bank stock. valuable as before. valuable as before. It turned out that he was right. It right. [¶] It right. ¶ It right. [¶] It is odd that he, a man of affairs, a purely business man, a man whose intellectual activities had been concerned all his life solely with finance and vast material commercial operations, should have been able to forecast with such certainty and such confidence the future of such a thing as a pile of paralysed paralysed paralyzed old books. It is odd, and yet it is hardly surprising, for he carries a most remarkable head upon his shoulders, and it has long ago ceased to surprise surprise be a surprise to surprise me when it does surprising things. I think he was the only person alive who considered those old books a valuable asset, but the result has verified his judgment. Within two or three years after the prediction years after the prediction years, after the prophecyediction years after the prediction the books had revived and had had had had begun to furnish my family an ample support; time has not diminished the figure, but enlarged it. furnish . . . enlarged it. pay me twenty thousand dollars a year, and since that time they have not varied from that figure except when they have gone ten or twenty thousand above it. furnish the my family an ample support; time has not diminished the figure, but enlarged it. furnish . . . enlarged it. My wife and I could could might possibly could could have been persuaded to let the copyrights go; but go; but go.; No, not my wife—but no doubt I could have been persuaded to it. However but period mended to a semicolon go; but nothing would have come of it, for Mr. Rogers would not have allowed the books to get away from us, and he is a very willful man. us, and he is a very willful man. us., and he is a very willful man. us, and he is a very willful man. He He He He ‘He’ underscored is the reason that my literature affords a generous support for my children, and will continue to afford it after I am gone until the Government needs their bread and butter and takes it from them under the only dishonorable copyright law that exists upon the planet outside of England. affords . . . after I am gone until the Government . . . England. has paid me as high as fifty-seven thousand dollars in a year, and will go well beyond that in the next twelve months, counting old books, new books, and magazine stuff. affords . . . after I am gone until the government . . . England. affords . . . after I am gone until the Government . . . England. l