11 April 1907 Thursday, April 11, 1907 Items from the Children’s Record: Susy’s quaint sayings; Clara’s innumerable damp-nurses, and description of Maria McManus, one of these nurses. Many months ago I extracted extracted dictated extracted a chapter from the old manuscript-book which we call the Children’s Record—a book in which Mrs. Clemens and I rather desultorily set down remarks made by the children when they were little. We were accustomed to make the entries in the book while the sayings were fresh, wherefore the Record reads like a diary, and not like bygone history. When I extracted extracted dictated extracted that chapter I observed that the Record has now attained to a value which we had not foreseen in those early days—not a value to persons outside the family, perhaps, but a value to me, because the thoughtless remarks of those innocent babblers, in which their tempers and characters characters characters were revealed, turned out to be turned out to be were turned out to be such an accurate forecast of what their characters were to be when they should be grown-ups. I wish to quote from the Record again. When Susy was something over three years old, her religious activities began to develop rapidly. Many of her remarks took color from this interest. Instances: She was found in the act of getting out her water-colors water-colors water-colors , one Sunday, to make vari-colored splotches and splashes on paper—which she considered “pictures.” Her mother said— “Susy, you forget it is Sunday.” “But, mamma, I was only going to paint a few pictures for Jesus, to take up with me when I go.” It was reverently said, though it does not sound so at this distant day. Her Aunt Sue used to sing a hymn for her which ended: “I love Jesus because He first loved me.” Susy’s mother sang it for her some months afterward, ending it as above, of course. But Susy, the just, the conscientious, corrected her, and said— “No, that is not right, mamma—it is because he first loved Aunt Sue.” The word “me” rather confused her. One day, on the ombra, she burst into song, as follows: “Oh Jesus are You dead, So You cannot dance and sing?” The air was exceedingly gay—rather pretty, too, and was accompanied by a manner and gestures that were equally gay and chipper. Her mother was astonished and distressed. She said— “Why Susy, did Maria teach you that dreadful song?” “No mamma, I made it myself, all out of my own head—nobody helped me.” She was plainly proud of it, and was going to repeat it, but refrained, by request. This reference to Maria brings that remarkable woman vividly before me, after all these slow-drifting years. The Record says: Maria McManus was one of Clara Clemens’s innumerable damp-nurses—a profane devil, and given to whisky whisky whiskey , tobacco, and also to some other vices. From Clara’s first birthday till some months had passed, passed, passed, her chances were uncertain. She could live on nothing but breast milk, and her mother could not furnish it. First we got Mary Lewis, the colored wife of John T. Lewis, (the (the (the colored lessee of Quarry Farm,) Farm,) Farm,) to supply it a couple of weeks; but the moment we tried to put her on prepared food she turned blue around the mouth and began to gasp. We thought she would not live fifteen minutes. When Mary Lewis’s tank was exhausted, we next got Maggie O’Day from Elmira, who brought her child with her and divided up her rations—not enough for the two; so we tried to eke out Clara’s share with prepared food, and failed—she turned blue again and came near perishing. We never tried prepared food any more. Next we got Lizzie Botheker. When she went dry, we got Patrick’s wife, Mary McAleer, to furnish the required milk. In turn, she went bankrupt. Then we got Maria—Maria McManus—and she stayed a year, until Clara was weaned. To me, but not to Mrs. Clemens, Maria was a delight, a darling, a never failing interest. She smoked all over the house; in the kitchen she swore, and used obscene language; she stole the beer from the cellar and got drunk on it and on stronger liquors, every now and then, and was a hard lot in every possible way—but Clara throve on her vices right along. In the shortest month in the year she drank two hundred and fifty-eight pints of my beer, without invitation, leaving only forty-two for me. I think it was the dryest month I ever spent since I first became a theoretical teetotaler. By certain arts and persuasions I enabled Clara to believe that every time she acquired a damp-nurse she also acquired the nurse’s name, and added it to her own. I taught her to rattle off the list glibly, and as she was not able to pronounce any of the names correctly, but butchered them all, I got great satisfaction out of hearing her do her little stunt. She did it gravely, and with innocent confidence that it was all right, and just so; and so whenever a stranger asked what her name was, she turned the whole battery loose on him, to wit: Clara Langdon Lewis O’Day Botheker McAleer McManus Clemens, and was not aware that she was playing any deception upon that stranger. Maria was proprietor of a baby, which was boarded at a house on the Gillette place and by and by died. Mrs. Clemens gave her twenty dollars, out of sympathy and to enable her to make a worthy and satisfactory funeral. It had that effect. Maria arrived home about eleven o’clock that night, as full as an egg and as unsteady on end; but Clara was as empty as she was full, so after a steady pull of twenty minutes her person was full to the ears of milk-punch constructed of lager-beer, cheap whisky whisky whiskey , rum, and wretched brandy, flavored with chewing-tobacco, cigar-smoke, and profanity; and the pair were regally “sprung” and serenely happy. Clara never throve so robustly on any nurse’s milk as she did on Maria’s, for no other milk had so much substance to it. It always had lemon-pie and green apples in it, and such other prohibited things as were believed by doctors to be fatal to children when administered to them through the breast of a nurse, but Clara always liked those things and prospered upon them. Maria was one of the most superb superb supurb creatures to look at I have ever seen. She was six feet high, and perfectly proportioned; she was erect, straight; she had the soldierly stride and bearing of a grenadier, and she was as finely brave as any grenadier that ever walked. She had a prodigal abundance of black hair; she was of a swarthy complexion, Egyptian in its tone; her features were nobly and impressively Egyptian; there was an Oriental dash about her costume and its colors, and when she moved across a room with her stately stride she was royal to look at—it was as if Cleopatra had come again. Out of idle curiosity, I once made a search of her room to see if there was anything interesting in it. Between her mattresses I found apples, pears, oranges—and the other fruit of the season—and enough of my cigars, smoking-tobacco, and beer, to start a shop with. Another would have reproached her, but I didn’t; I only admired her provident care of herself; I believed I would be just as thoughtful if I were a wet-nurse myself. A couple of years after Clara was done with her, in Hartford, she applied for a place as wet-nurse in an Institution in New York, and gave me as a reference. The President wrote and asked me if this was correct. I said it was, and gave her reference enough to elect the eleven thousand Virgins of Cologne, if they had been in Maria’s line of business. I said, give her all the beer and whisky and brandy and tobacco and green fruit and lemon-pie she might want, and turn her loose on the nursery, and have no solicitude about the results. More items from the Record: Susy and Mr. Millet—Mr. Clemens speaks of Millet: his beautiful character, his service as war correspondent, his marriage, his painting the first oil portrait of Mr. Clemens, etc.—Items from the Record, ending with Susy’s letter to Mr. Millet. Susy four and a half years old. Frank D. Millet, the young artist, came here some time ago, to paint my portrait, and remained with us a fortnight. A day after his arrival Susy asked her mother to read to her. Mr. Millet said: “I’ll read to you, Susy.” Susy said, with a grave, sweet grace, and great dignity— “I thank you, Mr. Millet, but I am a little more acquainted with mamma, and so I would rather she would do it.” Millet’s hair was black then; it isn’t now. My head was brown then; it is white now. Millet was unknown then; he is widely known now. Neither of us was acquainted with trouble then; we are familiar with it now. We were so young then! then! then;! semicolon mended to an exclamation point we are so old now. Millet was the dearest and most lovable human being of his sex anywhere to be found in that old day. He holds that beautiful supremacy yet, and can maintain it against all comers; age has not soured him; the sweetness that was born in him was born to stay. He has always had troops of affectionate friends; he still has troops of them, and not in America alone, but in England and in France. I don’t suppose he knows what an enemy is; I cannot conceive of his knowing how to acquire an enemy. Am I describing a male Miss Nancy? No, he was never that. Being an artist, and a good artist, he necessarily has a deal of poetry and sentiment in him, and they find expression upon his canvases; but he is also wise and practical, and also most masculinely brave. A year and a half after he painted my portrait, in Hartford, I encountered him rushing down the Boulevard des Italiens, in Paris, and asked him what was his hurry. He had in that hour been appointed war correspondent by the London Daily News, and was getting ready to start for the seat of war. A couple of hours later he had made all his arrangements, and was on the way. He was all through the war, and his closest and most admiring comrades were MacGahan MacGahan McGahan and Archibald Forbes, those daring knights of the pen. He was in the centre centre center of the hottest hottest hottest fire at Plevna, all day long; he was in the rest of the fights; in the rest of the fights; with the Russian General Staff in nearly every battle; in the rest of the fights; he was a valued comrade of the grand dukes and generals; the Emperor Emperor emperor was his friend, and decorated him on the field, for valor. Deadly peril seemed to have a charm for him, and for MacGahan MacGahan McGahan and Forbes, and they had many a thrilling success in hunting it up and enjoying it; wherever news was to be had they proceeded to that place, let the distance and the dangers be what they might. Millet had a dozen subordinates under him, and twenty-three horses, and he developed great executive ability in handling these resources. When the war was over he returned to Paris, resumed his painting, and got married. We were at the wedding and added our share to the display of wedding presents. I contributed a stick of fire-wood decorated with pretty ribbons, and of course it ranked as jewelry, as any one will know who had to pay for wood fires in the French capital in those days. Millet’s business ability exploited itself again at the World’s Exposition in Chicago in honor of Christopher Columbus, in 1893. The decorating of the White City was placed in his hands; he had a great company of artists of repute under him; he ordered everything, superintended everything, finished his great work on time, did it thoroughly well, and kept peace in his art-family all the way through. The executive capacity which he displayed brought him an abundance of compliments; among others, he was offered, at a great salary, the chief managership of the largest and wealthiest coal business in Chicago; but he preferred his art to riches, riches, riches, and declined that that that, and other fine offers of the kind. When Millet came to Hartford to paint the first oil portrait that was ever made of me, he gave me a small picture—a Dutch interior, which was his earliest effort in oils, and I have it yet. At our first sitting he dashed off a charcoal outline of me on his canvas which was so good and strong and lifelike that Mrs. Clemens wouldn’t allow him to add any paint, lest he damage it. She bought it. He had brought but the one canvas from Boston, so he had to go down town and get another. I remained outside on the sidewalk while he went into the art shop to stretch the canvas on the frame. It was dull out there, and I tried to think of some way to put in the time usefully. I was successful. There was a barber shop near-by near-by near by , and I went in there to get the ends of my hair clipped off; I fell into a reverie, and when I woke up there was a bushel of brown hair on the floor and none on my head. When I joined Millet he took one glance, realized the disaster that had befallen, and said he wanted to go to some private place and cry. He devoted a couple of diligent weeks to the portrait and made a good one, if you don’t count the hair; but as there was no hair, he had to manufacture it, and his effort was a failure. I have the portrait yet, but the hair it wears is not hair at all; it is tarred oakum, and doesn’t harmonize with the rest of the structure. One day at dinner Millet told a charming little story. On a bleak and sleety day two men were drifting here and there over an old and neglected cemetery, and evidently seeking something. Sometimes they were wide apart, sometimes they crossed each other’s path, and at last they spoke. One said: “You do not seem to succeed.” “No.” “Neither do I.” “Whom do you seek?” “The dearest soul, the sweetest nature, the lovingest friend and the faithfulest, a man ever had. And you?” “I am seeking the hatefulest scoundrel the human race has ever produced; I want to curse his ashes.” They separated, and searched again far and wide; at last they came together, and together they scraped the moss from a gravestone and revealed the inscription: both had been seeking the same man! Of course the moral of the story is that there is a good side and a bad side to most people, and in accordance with your own character and disposition you will bring out one of them and the other will remain remain remained a sealed book to you. Millet had painted himself without knowing it. He is not capable of bringing out the bad side of anybody. He would bring out the good and lovable side every time, and never find out that there was any other. January, 1877. The other evening after the children’s prayers, Mrs. Clemens told Susy she must often think of Jesus, and ask him to help her to overcome bad impulses. Susy said: “I do think of him, mamma. Every day I see His cross on my Bible and I think of Him then—the cross they crucified Him on. It was too bad—I was quite sorry It was too bad—I was quite sorry It was too bad—I was quite sorry ‘It was too bad—I was quite sorry’ underscored .” May 4. When Miss Hesse ceased from her office of private secretary and took final leave of us to-day, Susy said gravely— “I am losing all my friends.” This is rather precocious flattery. As little as Susy was, she was a diligent reader, and in at least one particular she was like the rest of the human race, grown-ups and all; that is to say, she was likely to take the color of the latest book she had read and whose style she had admired. As a result of this she sometimes delivered herself of impressive formalities of speech which sounded quaintly enough coming from such a small person. I quote: May 4. Yesterday Susy had a present of a new parasol, and hit Clara a whack with it—to see if it was substantial, perhaps. Rosa, the nurse, took it away from her and put it in the blue-room. Susy was vastly frightened, and begged Rosa not to tell on her, but her pleadings failed. In the evening Susy said, with earnestness— “Mamma, I begged, and begged, and begged, Rosa not to tell you—but all in vain but all in vain but all in vain ‘but all in vain’ underscored .” A month or more ago, Clara was naughty in the nursery and did not finish her dinner. In the evening she was hungry, and her mamma gave her a cracker. I quote now from a letter written to me by her mother when I was in Baltimore two or three days ago. “Last night after George had wiped off Clara’s sticky fingers in the china closet she came out, with her little sad, downcast look, and said, ‘I been litte naughty up ’tairs, can I have a cracker?’ I found that the naughtiness had been invented for the occasion.” The next paragraph in the Record is of date— July July “July 4, at the Farm. Farm. Farm.” There would be a grand display of fireworks down in Elmira, and the adult members of the farm tribe would sit in the grass on the hilltop and look out over the valley and enjoy the show: Susy being ordered to bed, said thoughtfully— “I wish I could sit up all night, as God does.” Letter to Millet, from Susy, March 1877: “Dear Mr. Millet Clara and I has both got valentines, I have a new fan and a German book and Clara’s got a new carrage— Papa teached me that tick, tick—my Grandfather’s clock was too large for the shelf so it stood 90 years on the floor. Mr. Millet is that the same clock that is in your picture— Dear Mr. Millet I give you my love, I put it on my heart to get the love out.” She refers to the little picture already mentioned, which was Millet’s first effort with the brush, and contains an old-fashioned stand-up-in-the-corner stand-up-in-the-corner stooand-up-in-the-corner clock.