11 January 1906 January title January Jan. 11, 1906 I received the following letter letter letter letter, some days ago, from Mrs. Laura K. Hudson: 287 287 287 “287 Quincy St. St. St. St., Jan 3d 06. Jan 3d 06. Jan 3d 06. Jan. 3d, ’06. New York, Jan. 3d, ’06. Mr. Samuel L. Clemens. My Dear Sir. Dear Sir. Dear Sir. dear Sir:- Some twenty years ago we were in the first years of our married life; the first two small instalments of a growing family kept us severely domestic and my husband and I used to spend our happy evenings together together together together, he reading aloud from magazine or book and I meanwhile sewing and listening. One evening he read from one of the New York papers the report of some function—I have a hazy idea it was a Press Club dinner or other jamboree—during which “Mark Twain” “Mark Twain” “Mark Twain” ‘Mark Twain’ read aloud a paper which to me seemed the best and funniest thing our great favorite had ever written. And now that the growing family has gotten its growth and has grown very fond of “Mark Twain” “Mark Twain” “Mark Twain” ‘Mark Twain’ I have searched high and low in every collection of his works for this delightful bit of fun fun fun fun, but always in vain. May I therefore apply to Mr. Clemens for some help? It was about a miner in his mountain-hut; to whom come three men for food and a night’s shelter. They give their names as Longfellow, Holmes and Whittier Whittier Whittier Whittier; and the way they are described—the last-mentioned with “double-chins way down to his stomach” “double-chins . . . stomach” “double-chins . . . stomach” ‘double-chins . . . stomach’ —by the miner who tells the story story story story, and the highflown highflown highflown high-flown quotations from their own writings which they give in answer to the miner’s very very very very gruff and to-the-point questions are fun of the funniest kind. The miner stands it until in answer to some self-satisfied remark of his in reference to his comfortable cabin the Pseudo-Holmes retorts: “Build “Build “Build ‘Build thee more stately mansions, oh oh oh O my soul!” soul!” soul!” soul!’ and so on through the entire stanza. Then he rises in his wrath and puts the three poets out. Any light you can throw on the name and possible whereabouts of this delightful child of your muse will be most gratefully received by my husband, my three sons sons sons sons, and their “Mark-Twain”-loving Mother “Mark-Twain”-loving Mother “Mark-Twain”-loving Mother ‘Mark-Twain’-loving mother ; who begs leave to call herself Yours Most Cordially Most Cordially Most Cordially most cordially, Laura K. Hudson. Hudson. Hudson. Hudson.” This morning I dictated an answer to my secretary, Miss Lyon, as follows: Dear Mrs. Hudson: I no ¶ Dear Mrs. Hudson: ¶ I Jan. 12. 1906. no ¶ Dear Mrs. Hudson: ¶ I no ¶ Dear Mrs. Hudson:— ¶ I ¶ January 11, 1906. Answer to a letter received this morning: ¶ Dear Mrs. Hudson:- ¶ I ¶ January 11, 1906. Answer to a letter received this morning: ¶ Dear Mrs. H.,—I am forever your debtor for reminding me of that curious passage in my life. During the first year or two after it happened, happened, happened happened, I could not bear to think of it. My it. My it, my it. My pain and shame were so intense, and my sense of having been an imbecile an imbecile a fool a fool an imbecile an imbecile so settled, established and confirmed, that established and confirmed, that established, confirmed. established and confirmed, that I drove the episode entirely from my mind— mind— mind; mind— and so all these twenty-eight or twenty-nine years I have lived in the conviction that my performance of that time was coarse, vulgar vulgar vulgar vulgar, and destitute destitute wholly destitute wholly destitute destitute of humor. But your suggestion that you and your family found humor in it twenty-eight years ago it twenty-eight years ago it it, it, 28 years ago ‘28’ circled by Munro to expand it twenty-eight years ago moved me to look into the matter. So matter. So matter; so matter. So I commissioned a Boston typewriter to delve among among into among the Boston papers papers papers papars of that bygone time, time, time, time and send me a copy of it. It ¶ It no ¶ It ¶ It came this morning, and if there is any vulgarity about it I am not able not able unable not able to discover it. If it. If it; if it. If it isn’t innocently and ridiculously funny, isn’t innocently and ridiculously funny, is not innocently and approximately funny isn’t innocently and ridiculously funny, I am no judge. I judge. I judge. It is my intention that within the next two months the public shall hear from it and sit in judgment upon it once more. By and by I judge. I will see to it that you get a copy. copy. copy. ¶ Sincerely Yours. ¶ (signed) S. L. Clemens. copy. Address Address “Address “Address Address of Samuel L. Clemens (“Mark Twain” “Mark Twain” “Mark Twain” ‘Mark Twain’ )From a report of the dinner given by the Publishers of the Atlantic Monthly in honor of the Seventieth Anniversary of the Birth of John Greenleaf Whittier, at the Hotel Brunswick, Boston, December 17, 1877 1877 1877) 1877.” 1877 , as published in theBOSTON EVENING TRANSCRIPT, December 18, 1877 Mr. ¶ Mr. ¶ Mr. no ¶ Mr. Chairman—This is an occasion peculiarly meet for the digging up of pleasant reminiscences concerning literary folk; therefore I will drop lightly into history myself. Standing here on the shore of the Atlantic and contemplating certain of its largest largest biggest largest literary billows billows billows billows deleted, then restored with the instruction ‘stet’ , I am reminded of a thing which happened to me thirteen thirteen fifteen fifteen thirteen thirteen years ago, when I had just succeeded in stirring up a little Nevadian literary puddle puddle ocean-puddle ocean puddle puddle myself, whose spume-flakes were beginning to blow thinly Californiawards Californiawards California-wards Californiawards . I started an inspection tramp inspection tramp inspection-tramp inspection tramp through the southern southern Southern southern mines of California. I was callow and conceited, and I resolved to try the virtue of my nom de guerre nom de guerre nom de plume nom de plume nom de guerre nom de guerre ‘nom de guerre’ underscored nom de guerre . I very soon had an opportunity. I knocked at a miner’s lonely log cabin in the foot hills foot hills foot-hills foot hills foothills of the Sierras just at night-fall night-fall nightfall night-fall . It was snowing at the time. A jaded, melancholy man of fifty, barefooted barefooted barefooted bare-footed bare-footed bare-headed , opened to me opened to me opened to me opened the door to me . When he heard my nom de guerre, nom de guerre, nom de plume, nom de plume, nom de guerre nom de guerre, ‘nom de guerre,’ underscored nom de guerre he looked more dejected than before. He let me in—pretty reluctantly, I thought—and after the customary bacon and beans, black coffee and a hot whiskey a hot whiskey a hot whisky a hot whiskey hot whiskey , I took a pipe. This sorrowful man had not said three words up to this time. Now he spoke up and said said said said, in the voice of one who is secretly suffering, “You’re the fourth—I’m a-going a-going a-going going to move move move morve .” “The “The “The The fourth what?” said I. “The fourth littery littery littery literary man that’s that’s that’s that has been here in twenty-four hours—I’m a-going a-going a-going going to move.” “You don’t tell me!” said I; “who who Who who were the others?” “Mr. Longfellow, Mr. Emerson, Emerson, Emerson, Emerson and Mr. Oliver Wendell Holmes—consound consound dad fetch consfound consound conasound the lot!” lot!” lot!” The Miner’s Story. lot!” You can easily believe I was interested. I supplicated—three hot whiskeys whiskeys whiskies whiskeys did the rest—and finally the melancholy miner began. Said he— “They “They They “They came here just at dark yesterday evening, and I let them in of course. Said they were going to Yosemite Yosemite Yo Semite Yosemite the Yosemite . They were a rough lot, but that’s nothing; lot, . . . nothing; lot— . . . nothing— lot, . . . nothing; everybody looks rough that travels afoot. Mr. Emerson was a seedy little bit of a chap, red-headed chap, red-headed chap—red headed chap, red-headed . Mr. Holmes was as fat as a balloon; he weighed as much as three hundred, and had double chins all the way down to his stomach. Mr. Longfellow was built like a prize fighter prize fighter prize fighter prize-fighter prize-fighter . His head was cropped and bristly, bristly, bristly— bristly, like as if he had a wig made of hair-brushes hair-brushes hair-brushes hairbrushes . His nose lay straight down his face, like a finger finger finger, finger with the end joint end joint end-joint end joint tilted up. They had been drinking; drinking; drinking— drinking; drinking, I could see that. And what queer talk they used! Mr. Holmes inspected this cabin, then he took me by the buttonhole buttonhole button-hole buttonhole , and says he— “ ‘Through “ ‘Through “Through ‘Through “‘Through “ ‘Through the deep caves of thought I hear a voice that sings; sings; sings: sings; sings, Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul!’ soul!’ Soul!” soul!” soul!’ “Says ¶ “Says ¶ Says no ¶ Says ¶ “Says ¶ “Says I, ‘I can’t afford it, Mr. Holmes, and moreover I don’t want to.’ Blamed if I liked it pretty well, either, coming from a stranger, that way. However, I started to get out my bacon and beans, when Mr. Emerson came and looked on a while a while a while awhile , and then he takes me aside by the buttonhole buttonhole button-hole button-hole buttonhole and says— “ ‘Give “ ‘Give “Give ‘Give “‘Give “ ‘Give me agates for my meat; Give me cantharids to eat; From air and ocean bring bring bring being me foods, From all zones and altitudes.’ “Says ¶ “Says ¶ Says no ¶ Says ¶ “Says ¶ “Says I, ‘Mr. Emerson, if you’ll excuse me, this ain’t no hotel.’ You see it sort of riled me—I warn’t used to the ways of littery swells. But I went on a-sweating over my work, and next comes Mr. Longfellow and buttonholes buttonholes button-holes buttonholes me, and interrupts me. Says he, “ ‘Honor “ ‘Honor “Honor ‘Honor “‘Honor “ ‘Honor be to Mudjekeewis! You shall hear how Pau-Puk-Keewis Pau-Puk-Keewis Pau-Puk-Keewis Pau-Puk Keewis Pau-Pak-Keewis —’ “But ¶ “But ¶ But no ¶ But ¶ “But ¶ “But I broke in, and says I, ‘Begging Begging Begging Beg your pardon, Mr. Longfellow, if you’ll be so kind as to hold your yawp for about five minutes minutes minutes, minutes and let me get this grub ready, you’ll do me proud.’ Well, sir, after they’d filled up up up, up I set out the jug. Mr. Holmes looks at it it it, it and then he fires up all of a sudden and yells— “ ‘Flash “ ‘Flash “Flash ‘Flash “‘Flash “ ‘Flash out a stream of blood-red wine! For I would drink to other days.’ “By “By By “By “By George, I was getting kind of worked up. I don’t deny it, I was getting kind of worked up. I turns to Mr. Holmes, and says I, ‘Looky here Looky here Looky-here Looky here , my fat friend, I’m a-running this shanty, and if the court knows knows knows knowns herself, you’ll take whiskey-straight whiskey-straight whisky-straight whiskey-straight a whiskey straight a whiskey straight whiskey straight or you’ll go dry.’ dry.’ dry!” dry.” dry.’ Them’s the very words I said to him. Now I didn’t didn’t didn’t don’t want to sass such famous littery people, but you see they kind of forced me. There ain’t nothing onreasonable ’bout me; I don’t mind a passel of guests a-tread’n a-tread’n a-tread’n a-treadin’ on my tail tail tail trail three or four times, but when it comes to standing on it it it, it it’s different, ‘and if the court knows herself,’ I says, ‘you’ll different, ‘and if the court knows herself,’ I says, ‘you’ll different. ‖ and if the court knows herself, you’ll different, and if the court knows herself you’ll different, ‘and if the court knows herself,’ I says, ‘you’ll textual note: SLC’s revisions to the MS created an inadvertent reduplication of text, which was subsequently further revised by SLC on a missing stage of transmission take whiskey-straight whiskey-straight whisky-straight whiskey straight or you’ll go dry.’ dry.’ dry!” dry. dry.’ Well, between drinks they’d swell around the cabin and strike attitudes and spout. spout. spout. spout.; spout; Says Mr. Longfellow— “ ‘This “ ‘This “This ‘This “‘This “ ‘This is the forest primeval.’ “Says ¶ “Says ¶ Says no ¶ Says Mr. Emerson— “ ‘Here “ ‘Here “Here ‘Here “‘Here “ ‘Here once the embattled farmers stood, And fired the shot heard round the world.’ “Says ¶ “Says ¶ Says no ¶ Says I, ‘O, blackguard the premises as much as you want to—it don’t cost cost cost you cost a cent.’ Well, they went on drinking, Says . . . drinking, Says . . . drinking, Says . . . drinking, written in the margin next to the deleted passage: ‘This makes the desired 9-line reduction SLC’ not in and pretty soon they got out a greasy old deck and went to playing euchre euchre cut-throat euchre euchre at ten cents a corner—on trust. I begun begun begun began to notice some pretty suspicious things. Mr. Emerson dealt, looked at his hand, shook his head, says— “ ‘I “ ‘I “I ‘I “‘I “ ‘I am the doubter and the doubt—’ and ca’mly and ca’mly —and calmly and calmly and ca’mly bunched the hands and went to shuffling for a new lay out lay out lay-out lay out layout . Says he— “ ‘They “ ‘They “They ‘They “‘They “ ‘They reckon ill who leave me out; They know not well the subtle ways I keep. I pass, ways I keep. I pass, ways I keep. I pass, ways I keep. I pass and deal again!’ “Hang’d ¶ “Hang’d ¶ Hang’d no ¶ Hang’d if he didn’t go ahead and do it, too! O, he was a cool one! Well, in about a minute, things were running pretty tight, but all of a sudden sudden sudden minute sudden I see by Mr. Emerson’s eye that eye that eye that eye he judged he had ’em. He had already corralled two tricks tricks tricks, tricks and each of the others one. So now he kind of lifts a little in his chair little in his chair little, in his chair, little in his chair, little in his chair and says— “ ‘I “ ‘I “I ‘I “‘I “ ‘I tire of globes and aces!— Too long the the the a game is played!’ —and no ¶ —and ¶ —and no ¶ —and down he fetched a right bower. Mr. Longfellow smiles as sweet as pie pie pie, pie and says— “ ‘Thanks “ ‘Thanks “Thanks ‘Thanks “‘Thanks “ ‘Thanks , thanks to thee, my worthy friend, For the lesson thou hast hast has has taught’; taught’; taught!” taught”; taught,’ —and blamed no ¶ —and blamed ¶ —and dog my cats no ¶ —and dog my cats no ¶ —and blamed if he didn’t down with another right bower! Well, sir, up jumps Holmes, a-war-whooping a-war-whooping a-war-whooping, a-war-whooping as usual, and says— “ ‘God “ ‘God “God help them if the tempest swings The pine against the palm!’ palm!’ palm!” —and no ¶ —and ¶ —and no ¶ —and I wish I may go to grass if he didn’t swoop down with another right bower! Well . . . another right bower! Well . . . another right bower! ‘another’ underscored twice for small capitals Well . . . another right bower! not in; probably an eyeskip Emerson claps his hand on his bowie, Longfellow claps his on his revolver, and I went under a bunk. There was going to be trouble; but that monstrous Holmes rose up, wobbling his double chins, and says he, ‘Order, gentlemen; the first man that draws, I’ll lay down on him and smother him!’ All quiet on the Potomac, you bet you bet you bet you you bet ! “They ¶ “They no ¶ They ¶ They ¶ “They ¶ “They were pretty how-come-you-so, by now by now now by now by now , and they begun to blow. Emerson says, ‘The nobbiest nobbiest bulliest bulliest nobbiest nobbiest thing I ever wrote wrote wrote, wrote was Barbara Frietchie.’ Barbara Frietchie.’ Barbara Frietchie.” ‘Barbara Frietchie.’ ” “Barbara Frietchie?” ’ “Barbara Frietchie.’ Barbara Frietchie.’ Says Longfellow, ‘It don’t begin with my Biglow Papers.’ Biglow Papers.’ Biglow Papers.” ‘Biglow Papers.’ ” “Biglow Papers.” ’ ‘Biglow Papers.’ Biglow Papers.’ Says Holmes, Holmes, Holmes, Holmes ‘My Thanatopsis Thanatopsis Thanatopsis ‘Thanatopsis’ “Thanatopsis” ‘Thanatopsis’ Thanatopsis lays over ’em both.’ both.’ both.” both.’ both. They mighty near ended in a fight. Then they wished they had some more company—and Mr. Emerson pointed at at at to me and says— “ ‘Is “ ‘Is “Is “‘Is “ ‘Is yonder squalid peasant all That this proud nursery could breed?’ “He ¶ “He ¶ He no ¶ He was a-whetting his bowie on his boot—so I let it pass. Well, sir, next they took it into their heads that they would like some music; so they made me stand up and sing ‘When Johnny Comes Marching Home’ sing ‘When Johnny Comes Marching Home’ sing “When Johnny Comes Marching Home” sing, “When Johnny comes marching home” sing ‘When Johnny Comes Marching Home’ till I dropped—at thirteen minutes past four this morning. That’s what I’ve I’ve I’ve I’ve been through, my friend. When I woke at seven, they were leaving, thank goodness, and Mr. Longfellow had my only boots on, and his’n his’n his own his’n under his arm. Says I, ‘Hold on, there, Evangeline, what are you what are you what you what are you going to do with them?’ He says, says, says: says, ‘Going to make tracks with ’em; because— “ ‘Lives “ ‘Lives “Lives ‘Lives “‘Lives “ ‘Lives of great men all remind us We can make our lives sublime; And, And, And And, departing, leave behind us Footprints on the sands of Time.’ Time.’ Time.” time.’ time.” “As I said, Mr. Twain, you are the fourth in twenty-four hours—and I’m a-going a-going a-going going to move move move morve ; I ain’t suited to ¶ “As . . . suited to missing; the bottom of the MS page has been cut off ¶ As . . . suited to no ¶ As . . . suited to a littery atmosphere.” I said to the miner, “Why, Why, Why Why, my dear sir, these were not the gracious singers to whom we and the world pay loving reverence and homage; homage; homage: homage; these were impostors.” The miner investigated me with a calm eye for a while; then said he, “Ah! impostors Ah! impostors Ah—impostors Ah! impostors , were they? are you are you —are you are you Are you ?” I ¶ I no ¶ I ¶ I did not pursue the subject, subject, subject; subject, and since then I haven’t travelled haven’t travelled haven’t traveled haven’t travelled have not traveled have not travelled on my nom de guerre nom de guerre nom de plume nom de plume nom de guerre nom de guerre ‘nom de guerre’ underscored nome de guerre nom de guerre enough to hurt. Such was was is was the reminiscence reminiscence reminiscence reminiscene I was moved to contribute, Mr. Chairman. In my enthusiasm I may have exaggerated the details a little, but you will easily forgive me that fault, fault, fault fault, since I believe it is the first time I have ever deflected from perpendicular fact on an occasion like this. What I have said to Mrs. Hudson Hudson Hudson Hudson H. is true. I did suffer during a year or two from the deep humiliations of that episode. But at last, in 1878 1878 1888 erroneous date ascribed to Hobby, not SLC , in Venice, my wife and I came across Mr. and Mrs. A. P. Chamberlaine Chamberlaine Chamberlaine Chamberlaine C. , of Concord, Massachusetts Massachusetts Mass. Massachusetts , and a friendship began then of the sort which nothing but death terminates. The Chamberlaines Chamberlaines Chamberlaines Chamberlaines’s C.’s were very bright people and in every way charming and companionable. We were together a month or two in Venice and several months in Rome, afterwards, and one day that lamented lamented accursed accursed lamented lamented break of mine was mentioned. And when I was on the point of lathering those people for bringing it to my mind when I had gotten the memory of it almost squelched, I perceived with joy that the Chamberlaines Chamberlaines Chamberlaines Chamberlaines C.’s were indignant about the way that my performance had been received in Boston. They poured out their opinions most freely and frankly frankly most frankly most frankly frankly about the frosty attitude frosty attitude stupidity stupidity frosty attitude frosty attitude of the people who were present at that performance, and about the Boston newspapers for the position position solemn and mournful position position they had taken in regard to the matter. That position was that I had been irreverent beyond belief, beyond imagination. Very well, I had accepted that as a fact for a year or two, and had been thoroughly miserable about it whenever I thought of it—which was not frequently, if I could help it. Whenever I thought of it I wondered how I ever could have been inspired to do so unholy a thing. Well, the Very . . . Well, the Very . . . Well, the Very . . . Well, the SLC circled ‘Very . . . Well,’ and wrote ‘strike out’ in the margin, also writing ‘T’ over the ‘t’ in ‘the’; then he restored the passage with the instruction ‘stet’ without reinstating the lowercase ‘t’ Chamberlaines Chamberlaines Chamberlaines Chamberlaines C.’s comforted me, but they did not persuade me to continue to think about the the that thate the unhappy unhappy not in unhappy unhappy episode. I resisted that. I tried to get it out of my mind, and let it die, and I succeeded. Until Mrs. Hudson’s Hudson’s Hudson’s Hudson’s H.’s letter came the other day, came the other day, came the other day, came, the other day, came, it had been a good twenty-five years since I had thought of that matter; matter; matter; matter, and when she said that the thing was funny I wondered if possibly she might might might not might not might be right. At any rate, my curiosity was aroused, and I wrote to Boston and got the whole thing copied, as above set forth. I vaguely remember some of the details of that gathering—dimly I can see a a one one a a hundred people—no, perhaps fifty—shadowy figures sitting at tables feeding, ghosts now to me, and nameless forever more forever more forever more forevermore . I don’t know who they were, but I can very distinctly see see see see, seated at the grand table and facing the rest of us, Mr. Emerson, supernaturally grave, unsmiling; Mr. Whittier, grave, lovely, his beautiful spirit shining out of his face—a Quaker, but smiley and sweet; face—a Quaker, but smiley and sweet; face—a Quaker, but smiley and sweet; face;—a Quaker, but smiley and sweet; face; Mr. Longfellow, with his silken white hair and his benignant face; Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, flashing smiles and affection and all good-fellowship good-fellowship good fellowship good-fellowship everywhere like a rose-diamond whose facets are being turned toward the light first one way and then another—a charming man, and always fascinating, whether he was talking or whether he was sitting still (what he would call still, but what would be more or less motion to other people). I can see those figures with entire distinctness across this abyss of time. One ¶ One no ¶ One ¶ One ¶ One other feature is clear—Willie Winter Winter Winter, Winter (for these past thousand years dramatic editor of the New York Tribune, New York Tribune, New York Tribune, “New York Tribune,” “New York Tribune,” and still occupying that high post in his old age) was there. He was much younger then than he is now, and he showed it. It was always a pleasure to me to pleasure to me to treat to treat to pleasure to me to pleasure to me to see Willie Winter at a banquet. During a matter of twenty years years years, years, years I was seldom at a banquet where Willie Winter was not also present, and where he did not read a charming poem written for the occasion. He did it this time, and it it not in it it was up to standard. There was never any vigor in his poetry, but it was always smooth, wavy, and standard. There . . . and the standard. There . . . and standard.: There . . . and written in the margin next to the canceled words: ‘strike out’; period mended to a colon standard: dainty, happy, happy, not in happy, happy, choicely phrased, phrased, phrased phrased, phrased, and as good to listen to as music—and he did love to recite those occasional poems, with a love that is beyond understanding. There was no doubt of his joy in the performance. His delight in it was absolutely innocent; his unoffending admiration of his poems; his perfect manner of reading them—it was all beautiful to see. He recited from memory, sometimes, a very long speech, exquisitely phrased, faultlessly modeled, yet sounding music—and . . . yet sounding music—and . . . yet sounding music,—and . . . yet and sounding written in margin next to the canceled words: ‘strike out’ music, and sounding exactly as if it was pouring unprepared out of heart and brain. He was a perfect reciter of both his poetry and his prose, and in both instances they were music. But if he was well down in the list of performers, then his performance was worth two or three times as much as it was when he was appointed to enter the field earlier, because if he was down a little way in the list it gave him a chance to drink a thimbleful thimbleful thimblefull of champagne, and that was all that was necessary for Willie Winter. I can see him so clearly: clearly: clearly: clearly; his small figure bent persuasively forward, his face glowing with inspiration—part of it from his poetry, the rest from his thimbleful thimbleful thimblefull of champagne. He would throw out a dainty line or two and then glance up this way, that way, the other way, collecting appreciation; and in the meantime he would be, not spitting—that is vulgar—but doing what any man properly charged with champagne does when he feels that he has got his mouth full of raw cotton and must rid himself of it. He did that all the way through, while he was reciting, and he was the happiest man in the world. And on this particular occasion that I am speaking of he was charming. It was a beautiful thing to see, and I wished he was drunker. He got such effects out of that thimbleful thimbleful thimblefull of champagne I wondered what would happen if he had had a tubfull. Now at that point ends all that was pleasurable about that notable celebration of Mr. Whittier’s seventieth birthday—because I got up at that point and followed Winter, with what I have no doubt I supposed would be the gem of the evening—the gay oration above quoted from the Boston paper. evening—the . . . paper. evening. evening.—the . . . paper. evening—the . . . paper. I had written it all out the day before, before, before, before and had perfectly memorized it, and I stood up there at my genial and happy and self-satisfied ease, and began to deliver it. Those majestic guests, that row of venerable and still active volcanoes, listened, as did everybody else in the house, with attentive interest. Well, I delivered myself of—we’ll say the first two hundred words of my speech. I was expecting no returns from that part of the speech, but this was not the case as regarded the rest of it. I arrived now at the dialogue: “The “The ‘The ‘The old miner said ‘You said ‘You said “You said, “You are the fourth, I’m going to move.’ ‘The move.’ ‘The move.” “The fourth what?’ what?’ what?” said I. He answered, ‘The ‘The “The fourth littery man that has been here in twenty-four hours. I am going to move.’ ‘Why, you don’t move.’ ‘Why, you don’t move.” “Why, you don’t move.” “Why don’t you tell me,’ me,’ me,” said I. ‘Who ‘Who “Who were the others?’ ‘Mr. others?’ ‘Mr. others?” “Mr. Longfellow, Mr. Emerson, Mr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, consound the lot’ ”— lot’ ”— lot”’— lot” ’— lot—” ’ Now ¶ Now no ¶ Now ¶ Now ¶ Now then the house’s attention attention attention attention ‘attention’ underscored attention continued, but the expression of interest in the faces turned to a sort of black frost. I wondered what the trouble was. I didn’t know. I went on, but with difficulty—I struggled along, and entered upon that miner’s fearful description of the bogus Emerson, the bogus Holmes, the bogus Longfellow, always hoping—but with a gradually perishing hope—that somebody would laugh, or that somebody would at least smile, but nobody did. I didn’t know enough to give it up and sit down, I was too new to public speaking, and so I went on with this awful performance, and carried it clear through to the end, in front of a body of people who seemed turned to stone with horror. It was the sort of expression their faces would have worn if I had been making these remarks about the Deity and the rest of the Trinity; there is no milder way in which to describe the petrified condition and the ghastly expression of those people. When I sat down it was with a heart which had long ceased to beat. I shall never be as dead again as I was then. I shall never be as miserable again as I was then. I speak now as one who doesn’t know what the condition of things may be in the next world, but in this one I shall never be as wretched again as I was then. Howells, Howells, Howells, Howells who was near me, tried to say a comforting word, but couldn’t get beyond a gasp. There was no use—he understood the whole size of the disaster. He had good intentions, but the words froze before they could get out. It was an atmosphere that would freeze anything. If Benvenuto Cellini’s salamander had been in that place he would not have survived to be put into Cellini’s autobiography. There was a frightful pause. There was an awful silence, a desolating silence. Then the next man on the list had to get up—there was no help for it. That was Bishop—Bishop, now forgotten, had Bishop, now forgotten, had Bishop, now forgotten, had Bishop, now forgotten, had Bishop had just burst handsomely upon the world with a most acceptable novel, which had appeared in theAtlantic Monthly, Atlantic Monthly, “Atlantic Monthly,” underscore of ‘Atlantic Monthly,’ canceled and quotation marks inserted Atlantic Monthly, “Atlantic Monthly,” a place which would make any novel respectable and any author noteworthy. In this case the novel itself was recognized as being, without extraneous help, respectable. Bishop was away up in the public favor, and he was an object of high interest, consequently there was a sort of national expectancy in the air; we may say our American millions were standing, from Maine to Texas and from Alaska to Florida, holding their breath, their lips parted, their hands ready to applaud when Bishop should get up on that occasion, and for the first time in his life speak in public. It was under these damaging conditions that he he Bishop Bishop he he got up to “make good,” as the vulgar say. I had spoken several several many many several several times before, and that is the reason why I was able to go on without dying in my tracks, as I ought to have done—but Bishop had had no experience. He was up facing those awful deities—facing those other people, those strangers—facing human beings for the first time in his life, with a speech to utter. No doubt it was well packed away in his memory, no doubt it was fresh and usable, until I had been heard from. I suppose that after that, and under the smothering pall of that dreary silence silence silence silence SLC canceled a square bracket written in pencil preceding this word, which was at the beginning of a line , it began to waste away and disappear out of his head like the rags breaking from the edge of a fog, and presently there wasn’t any fog left. He didn’t go on—he didn’t last long. It was not many sentences after his first, first, first, first before he began to hesitate, and break, and lose his grip, and totter, and wobble, and at last he slumped down in a limp and mushy pile. Well, the program program programme for the occasion was probably not more than one-third finished, but it ended there. Nobody rose. The next man hadn’t strength enough to get up, and everybody looked so dazed, so stupefied, paralysed paralysed paralyzed , it was impossible for anybody to do anything, or even try. Nothing could go on in that strange atmosphere. Howells mournfully, and without words, hitched himself to Bishop and me and supported us out of the room. It was very kind—he was most generous. He towed us tottering away into some room in that building, and we sat down there. I don’t know what my remark was now, but I know the nature of it. It was the kind of remark you make when you know that nothing in the world can help your case. But Howells was honest—he had had had had to say the heart-breaking things he did say: that there was no help for this calamity, this shipwreck, this cataclysm; that this was the most disastrous thing that had ever happened in anybody’s history—and then he added, “That is, for you—and consider what you have done for Bishop. It is bad enough in your case, you deserve to suffer. You have committed this crime, and you deserve to have all you are going to get. But here is an innocent man. Bishop had never done you any harm, and see what you have done to him. He can never hold his head up again. The world can never look upon Bishop as being a live person. He is a corpse.” That is the history of that episode of twenty-eight years ago, which pretty nearly killed me with shame during that first year or two whenever it forced its way into my mind. Now Now Now Now, then, I take that speech up and examine it. As I said, it arrived this morning, from Boston. I have read it twice, and unless I am an idiot, it hasn’t a single defect in it from the first word to the last. It is just as good as good can be. It is smart; it is saturated with humor. There isn’t a suggestion of coarseness or vulgarity in it anywhere. What could have been the matter with that house? It is amazing, it is incredible, that they didn’t shout with laughter, and those deities the loudest of them all. Could the fault have been with me? Did I lose courage when I saw those great men up there whom I was going to describe in such a strange fashion? If that happened, if I showed doubt, that can account for it, for you can’t be successfully funny if you show that you are afraid of it. Well, I can’t account for it, it, it now, it, now, it, but if I had those beloved and revered old literary immortals back here now on the platform at Carnegie Hall I would take that same old speech, deliver it, word for word, and melt them till they’d run all over that stage. Oh, the fault must have been with me, it is not in the speech at all. All Boston shuddered for several days. All gaieties ceased, all festivities; even the funerals were without animation. There has never been so awful a time in Boston. Even the Massacre did not produce a like effect, nor the Anthony Burns episode, nor any other solemnity in Boston’s history. But I am glad that that lady mentioned this speech, which I should never have thought of again I suppose, for now I am going to apply the test, and I am going to find out whether it was Boston or whether it was myself that was in fault at that sad time of Mr. Bishop’s obsequies; for next summer I will drop down from the New Hampshire hills with that typewritten ancient speech in my hand, and I will go before the massed intellect of Boston—the Twentieth Century Club—and without revealing what it is that I am asking permission to talk about, I will lay those ancient facts before that unprejudiced jury and read that speech to them and see what the result will be. If they do not laugh and admire I shall commit suicide there. I would just as soon do it there as any place; and one time is as good as another to me. All . . . to me. All Boston . . . to me. All Boston . . . to me. all.