20 June 1906 Wednesday, June 20, 1906 The defects about Bibles—Remarks about the Immaculate Conception. There are one or two curious defects about Bibles. An almost pathetic poverty of invention characterizes them all. That is one striking defect. Another is that each pretends to originality, without possessing any. any. any. of large importance. any. Each borrows from the others, others, others, others, and gives no credit, which is a distinctly immoral act. Each, in turn, confiscates decayed old stage-properties old stage-properties and shop-worn old stage-properties old stage-properties from the others, others, others, others, and with naïve naïve naiïve dieresis added naiïve dieresis added confidence puts them forth as fresh new inspirations from on high. We borrow the Golden Rule from Confucius, after it has seen service for centuries, and copyright it without a blush. When we want a Deluge Deluge dDeluge Deluge we go away back to hoary Babylon and borrow it, and are as proud of it and as satisfied with it as if it had been worth the trouble. We still revere it and admire it, to-day, and claim that it came to us direct from the mouth of the Deity; whereas we know that Noah’s flood never happened, and couldn’t have happened. The flood is a favorite with Bible-makers Bible-makers Bible-makers Bible-makers . If there is a Bible—or even a tribe of savages—that lacks a General Deluge General Deluge gGeneral dDeluge General Deluge it is only because the religious scheme that lacks it hadn’t any handy source to borrow it from. Another prime favorite with the authors of sacred literature and founders of religions is the Immaculate Conception. It had been worn threadbare before we adopted it as a fresh new idea—and we admire it as much now as did the original conceiver of it when his mind was delivered of it a million years ago. The Hindoos Hindoos Hindus prized it ages ago when they acquired Krishna by the Immaculate process. The Buddhists were happy when they acquired Gautama by the same process twenty-five hundred years ago. The Greeks of the same period had great joy in it when their Supreme Being Supreme Being sSupreme bBeing Supreme Being and his cabinet used to come down and people Greece with mongrels half human and half divine. The Romans borrowed the idea from Greece, and found great happiness in Jupiter’s Immaculate Conception products. We got it direct from Heaven, by way of Rome. We are still charmed with it. And only a fortnight ago, when an Episcopal clergyman in Rochester was summoned before the governing body of his Church to answer the charge of intimating that he did not believe that the Savior was miraculously conceived, the Rev. Dr. Briggs, who is perhaps the most daringly broad-minded religious person now occupying an an the an an American pulpit, took up the cudgels in favor of the Immaculate Conception, in an article in the North American Review, and from the tone of that article it seemed apparent that he believed he had settled that vexed question, question, question, question, once and for all. His idea was that there could be no doubt about it, for the reason that the Virgin Mary knew it was authentic because the Angel of the Annunciation told her so. Also, it must have been so, so, so, so, for the additional reason that Jude—a later son of Mary, the Virgin, and born in wedlock—was still living and associating with the adherents of the early Church Church church many years after the event, and that he said quite decidedly that it was a case of Immaculate Conception; therefore it must be true, for Jude was right there in the family and in a position to know. If there is anything more amusing than the Immaculate Conception doctrine, doctrine, doctrine, doctrine, it is the quaint reasonings whereby ostensibly intelligent human beings persuade themselves that the impossible fact is proven. If Dr. Briggs were asked to believe in the Immaculate Conception process as exercised in the cases of Krishna, Osiris, Buddha, and the rest of the tribe, he would decline, with thanks, and probably be offended. If pushed, he would probably say that it would be childish to believe in those cases, for the reason that they were supported by none but human testimony, and that it would be impossible to prove such a thing by human testimony, because if the entire human race were present at a case of Immaculate Conception they wouldn’t be able to tell when it happened, nor nor nor nor whether it happened at all—and yet this bright man with the temporarily muddy mind is quite able to believe an impossibility whose authenticity rests entirely upon human testimony—the testimony of but one human being, the Virgin herself, a witness not disinterested, but powerfully interested; a witness incapable of knowing the fact as a fact, but getting all that she supposed she knew about it at second-hand second-hand second hand ,—at second-hand second-hand second hand from an entire stranger, an entire stranger, an entire stranger, an entire stranger, an alleged angel, who could have been an angel, perhaps, but also could have been a tax collector. It is not likely that she had ever seen an angel before, or knew their trade-marks trade-marks trade-marks trade-marks . He was a stranger. He brought no credentials. His evidence was worth nothing at all to anybody else in the community. It is worth nothing, to-day, to any but minds which are like Dr. Briggs’s—which have lost their clarity through mulling over absurdities in the pious wish to dig something sane and rational out of them. The Immaculate Conception rests wholly wholly solely wholly wholly upon the testimony of a single witness—a witness whose testimony is without value—a witness whose very existence has nothing to rest upon but the assertion of the young peasant wife whose husband needed to be pacified. Mary’s testimony satisfied him, but that is because he lived in Nazareth, instead of New York. There isn’t any carpenter in New York that would take that testimony at par. If the Immaculate Conception could be repeated in New York to-day, there isn’t a man, woman, or child, of those four millions, millions, millions, millions, who would believe in it—except perhaps some addled Christian Scientist. A person who can believe in Mother Eddy wouldn’t strain at an Immaculate Conception, or six of them in a bunch. The Immaculate Conception could not be repeated successfully in New York in our day. It would produce laughter, not reverence and adoration. To a person who doesn’t believe in it, it seems a most puerile invention. It could occur to nobody but a god god Ggod god that it was a large and ingenious arrangement, arrangement, arrangement, arrangement, and had dignity in it. It could occur to nobody but a god god Ggod god that a divine Son procured through promiscuous relations with a peasant family in a village could improve the purity of the product, yet that is the very idea. The product acquires purity—purity absolute—purity from all stain or blemish,—through —through —through —through a gross violation of both human law and divine human law and divine divine human law and human law divine ‘1’ written above ‘human law’ and ‘2’ above ‘divine’; ‘tr’ written in the margin human and divine law , as set forth in the constitution and by-laws of the Bible. Thus the Christian religion, which requires everybody to be moral and to obey the laws, has its very very very very beginning in immorality and in disobedience to law. You couldn’t purify a tomcat tomcat Ttomcat ‘Tom cat’ marked to close up tomcat by the Immaculate Conception process. Apparently, as a pious stage-property stage-property stage-property stage-property , it is still useful, still workable, although it is so bent with age and so nearly exhausted by overwork. It is another case of begats. What’s-his-name begat Krishna, Krishna begat Buddha, Buddha begat Osiris, Osiris begat the Babylonian deities, they begat God, God, God.;, originally ‘God.’; altered by Hobby to ‘God;’ and then by SLC to ‘God,’ God, He begat Jesus, Jesus, Jesus., Jesus, Jesus begat Mrs. Eddy. If she is going to continue the line and do her proper share of the begatting, she must get at it, for she is already an antiquity. There is one notable thing about our Christianity: Christianity: Christianity;: semicolon mended to a colon Christianity: bad, bloody, merciless, money-grabbing and predatory as it is—in our country, particularly, and in all other Christian countries in a somewhat modified degree—it is still a hundred times better than the Christianity of the Bible, with its prodigious crime—the invention of hell hell Hell . Measured by our Christianity of to-day, bad as it is, hypocritical as it is, empty and hollow as it is, neither the Deity nor His His his Son is a Christian, nor qualified for that moderately high place. Ours is a terrible religion. The fleets of the world could swim in spacious comfort in the innocent blood it has spilt.