6 September 1907 Dictated September September Sept. 6, 1907 Call upon Lady Stanley; and upon Archdeacon Wilberforce, where Holy Grail is exhibited and story of its discovery related to Mr. Clemens by the Archdeacon. Ashcroft’s note———: Mr. Clemens called Mr. Clemens called Mr. Clemens Called on Lady Stanley, widow of the explorer, in the afternoon. In fact, that was one of my earliest calls. Lady Stanley was as eager and impulsive as ever, and as free from any concealment of her feelings as she was when I first knew her, a proud and happy young bride, so many years ago. Stanley has been dead three years and a half, but I think all her days and nights are spent in worship of him, and I believe he is almost as present to her as he was in life. She is an intense spiritualist, and has long lived in the atmosphere of that cult. Mrs. Myers Myers Meyers , her widowed sister, was the wife of the late president of the British Psychical Society, who was a chief among spiritualists. To me, who take no interest in other-worldly other-worldly other-worldly things, and am convinced that we know nothing whatever about them, and have been wrongly and uncourteously and contemptuously left in total ignorance of them, it is a pleasure and a refreshment to have converse with a person like Lady Stanley, who uncompromisingly believes in them; and not only believes in them but considers them important. She was as exactly and as comprehensively happy and content in her beliefs as I am in my destitution of them, and I perceived that we could exchange places and both of us be precisely as well off as we were before; for when all is said and done, the one sole condition that makes spiritual happiness, and preserves it, is the absence of doubt. Lady Stanley and I, and the black savage who worships a tar baby in the African jungle and is troubled by no religious doubts or misgivings, are just equals, and equally fortunately situated; either of us could change places with either of the others and be fully as well off as before; the trade would cost neither party the value of a farthing. Lady Stanley wanted to convert me to her beliefs and her faith; and there has been a time when I would have been eager to convert her to my position, but that time has gone by; I would not now try to unsettle any person’s religious faith, where it was untroubled by doubt—not even the savage African’s. I have found it pretty hard to give up missionarying—that least excusable of least excusable of lowest of least excusable of all human trades—but I was obliged to do it, because I could not continue to exercise it without private shame while publicly and privately deriding and blaspheming the other missionaries. I found that Stanley had left behind him an uncompleted autobiography autobiography Autobiography . It sets forth freely and frankly the details of his childhood and youth and early manhood, and stops with his adventures in our Civil War, if I remember rightly. Lady Stanley is preparing it for publication, and I was surprised, and also greatly gratified, to find that she was not purposing to suppress certain facts that used to sift around in whispers in Stanley’s lifetime—to wit, that he was of humble origin and was born in a workhouse. No doubt there was a time when she she Lady Stanley she would have been glad to see these things suppressed and forgotten, but she has risen above that; she lives upon a higher and worthier plane now; she perhaps realizes that those humble beginnings are matter for pride now, when one remembers how high the peerless explorer climbed in spite of them. I will mix my dates again—this in order to bring into immediate juxtaposition a couple of curiosities in the way of human intellectual gymnastics. Lady Stanley believes that Stanley’s spirit is with her all the time and talks with her about her ordinary daily concerns—a thing which is to me unthinkable. I wonder if it would be unthinkable to Archdeacon Wilberforce, also? I do not know, but I imagine that that would be the case. I imagine that the Immaculate Conception Immaculate Conception immaculate conception , and the rest of the impossibilities recorded in the Bible, would have no difficulties for him, because in those cases he has been trained from the cradle to believe the unbelievable, and is so used to it that it comes natural and handy to him—but that kind of teaching is no preparation for acceptance of other unbelievable things, to whose examination one comes with an untwisted and unprejudiced mind. Wilberforce is educated, cultured, and has a fine and acute mind, and he comes of an ancestry similarly equipped; therefore he is competent to examine new marvels with an open mind, and I think the chances are that he rejects the claims of spiritualism with fully as much confidence as he accepts Immaculate Conception Immaculate Conception immaculate conception . Is it possible that Mr. Wilberforce has been trained from the cradle up to believe in the Holy Grail? It does not seem likely; yet he does believe in it, and not only believes in it but believes he has it in his possession. If I had had this astonishing fact at second-hand I could not have believed it, and would not have believed it, even if I had gotten it from the twelve apostles in writing, with every signature vouched for by a notary public. I should have said that to an educated, cultured, highly intellectual man who believes he has held the Holy Grail in his hand, complete and unquestioning belief in Münchausen’s Münchausen’s Münchausens umlaut added , and in all other conceivable extravagances, must come easy. The text for what I am talking about now I find in this note of Ashcroft’s: Sunday, June 23 Sunday, June 23 Sunday June 23 . In the afternoon Mr. Clemens Mr. Clemens Mr. Clemens visited Archdeacon Wilberforce, 20 Dean’s Yard, Westminster. Sir William Crookes, Sir James Knowles, Mrs. Myers Myers Meyers (widow of author of “Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death”) and perhaps seventy-five or a hundred others were there. As soon as I entered I was told by the Archdeacon that a most remarkable event had occurred—that the long lost Holy Grail had at last been found, and that there could be no mistake whatever about its identity! identity! identity.! period mended to an exclamation point I could not have been more startled if a gun had gone off at my ear. For a moment, or at least half a moment, I supposed that he was not in earnest; then that supposition vanished; manifestly he was in earnest—indeed he was eagerly and excitedly in earnest. He leading, we plowed through the crowd to the centre centre center of the drawing-room drawing-room drawing-room , where Sir William Crookes, the renowned scientist, was standing. Sir William is a spiritualist. We closed in upon Sir William, Mrs. Myers Myers Meyers accosting me and joining us. Mr. Wilberforce then told me the rest of the story of the Holy Grail, and it was apparent that Sir William already knew all about it and was, moreover, a believer in the marvel. In brief, the story was that a young grain merchant, a Mr. Pole, had recently recently recently been visited in a vision by an angel who commanded him to go to a certain place outside the ancient Glastonbury Abbey, and said that upon digging in that place he would find the Holy Grail. Mr. Pole obeyed. He sought out the indicated spot and dug there, and under four feet of packed and solid earth he found the relic. All this had happened a week or ten days before this present conversation of June 23d. 23d. 23rd. single rule canceled