31 July 1906 Tuesday, July 31, 1906 Colonel Colonel Col. Harvey arrives to-night—Letter from Clara Clemens—Mr. Clemens receives copy of Mr. Duneka’s “Library of Humor”—Seventy-eight other humorists contained therein—Letter from Mr. Orr referring to “1601”—Three Three 3 letters from John Hay referring to same—Mr. Clemens’s reply—Mr. Clemens tells why he wrote “1601” and what it is, and of the private printing of several copies. Colonel Colonel Col. Harvey will arrive here to-night, to remain a day or two, and we shall have no trouble in straightening out the tangle which has been made in our affairs. affairs. affairs. by Mr. Duneka and his pal, Major Leigh, Treasurer of the Harper corporation. Since I got back here I have received a letter from my daughter Clara, who is spending her summer at Norfolk, Connecticut, and I shall at once dispatch a copy of it to Howells, for it contains a miracle which he and I were talking privately about last year—a compliment from child to father. We were remarking upon the fact that illustrious authors illustrious authors we gifted persons we illustrious authors can by their their our their talents compel compliments from everybody but their their one’s their own children. We are so close to them that our magnitude magnitude greatness greatness magnitude does not impress them. It is a commonplace to them, and does not thrill, does not stun, does not overawe. thrill, does not stun, does not overawe. thrill., does not stun, does not overawe. Naturally, we particularly want the compliments which we can’t get. When at last it comes spontaneously from the child—a thing which almost never happens—we are not merely gratified beyond all reason, but are struck dumb with pleasant astonishment. I shall insert Clara’s compliment here, where it can’t get lost. Uncle Uncle “Uncle Joe Joe§ Joe* Reverend Joseph H. Twichell—“uncle” by courtesy. *Reverend *Rev. came to see me to-day and I really can’t imagine what prompted him to do such a generous thing, but I appreciated it though I found no way to prove or even express it. He reminded me more than ever of you in his vivid, dramatic, moving, masterly way of painting an impressionist picture whenever he spoke—you two are alike also in tones of voice and anticipatory gesture. I had a rich enjoyment in his visit and felt very much like the kings that command private amusements that they share with no one. Uncle Joe sent you his love and spoke warmly of your Howells article which I have just this minute read with utmost delight. It has led me to read “Venetian Days”—or rather to the intention of reading it— it— it it— as soon as I can procure it, and has given me many minutes of laughter over the delicious criticism of stage-directions. Of course your thoughts are funny in themselves, themselves, themselves themselves, but not commandingly funny till you have dressed them up in that never-failing style of yours. The extract from “Venetian Days” is so beautiful that when one has finished it one seems to have been lying on a floating support of snowflakes, and one dreads to leave it, it, it, it in the same way that one hates to be pulled from a moment of reverie at sea, sea, sea, sea when, when, when, half hypnotized, hypnotized, hypnotized, one’s vague thoughts seem to move deliciously with the waves. waves. waves.” The western western Western pirate of whom Duneka had heard rumor rumor rumor and wanted to forestall by a piracy of his own, rumor and wanted to forestall, by a piracy of his own, Lyon canceled ‘and . . . forestall’; SLC added the comma and canceled ‘by . . . own,’ has really published his book, and my copyright lawyer has sent me a copy of it—a great fat, coarse, offensive volume, not with my name on it as perpetrator, but with its back inflamed with a big picture of me in lurid colors; colors; colors, colors,; comma mended to a semicolon placed there, of course, to indicate that I am the author of the crime. This book is a very interesting curiosity, in one way. It reveals the surprising fact that within the compass of these forty years wherein I have been playing professional humorist before the public, I have had for company seventy-eight other American humorists. Each and every one of the seventy-eight rose in my time, became conspicuous and popular, and, by and by, vanished. A number of these names were as familiar in their day as are the names of George Ade and Dooley to-day—yet they have all so completely passed from sight now that there is probably not a youth of fifteen years of age in the country whose eye would light with recognition at the mention of any one of the seventy-eight names. This book is a cemetery; and as I glance through it I am reminded of my visit to the cemetery in Hannibal, Missouri, four years ago, where almost every tombstone recorded a forgotten name that had been familiar and pleasant to my ear when I was a boy there fifty years before. In [¶] In In ¶ In this mortuary volume I find Nasby, Artemus Ward, Yawcob Strauss, Derby, Burdette, Eli Perkins, the “Danbury News Man,” Man,” Man,” Man,” Ike Partington, Q. K. Philander Doesticks, Orpheus C. Kerr, Smith O’Brien, Josh Billings, and a score of others, maybe twoscore twoscore two-score , whose writings and sayings were once in everybody’s mouth but are now heard of no more, and are no longer mentioned. Seventy-eight seems an incredible crop of well-known humorists for one forty-year period to have produced, and yet this book has not harvested the entire crop—far from it. It has no mention of Ike Partington, once so welcome and so well known well known well-known ; it has no mention of Doesticks, nor of the Pfaff crowd—nor of Artemus Ward’s numerous and perishable imitators; nor of three very popular Southern humorists whose names I am not able to recall; nor of a dozen other sparkling transients whose light shone for a time but has now, years ago, gone out. Why have they perished? Because they were merely merely merely humorists. Humorists of the “mere” sort of the “mere” sort of the “mere” sort cannot survive. Humor is only only merely only a fragrance, a decoration. Often it is merely an odd an odd a an odd trick of speech and spelling, and spelling, speech. and of spelling, speech. and spelling, as in the case of Ward and Billings and Nasby and the “Disbanded Volunteer,” “Disbanded Volunteer,” d“Disbanded vVolunteer,” and presently the fashion passes, and the fame along with it. There are those who say a novel should be a work of art solely, and you must not preach in it, it, it—, you must not teach in it. That may be true as regards novels, but it is not true as regards humor. Humor must not professedly professedly professedly ‘professedly’ underscored teach, it teach, it teach, and . I it ‘I’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ teach, . It it ‘I’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’, then entire word deleted must not professedly preach; but preach; but preach;. Bbut period mended to a semicolon; ‘B’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ it must do both if it would live forever. By forever, I mean thirty years. With all its preaching it is not likely to outlive outlive out-live so long a term as that. The very things it preaches about, and which are novelties when it preaches about them, can cease to be novelties and become commonplaces in thirty years. Then that sermon can thenceforth thenceforth thenceforth interest no one. I have always preached. That is the reason that I have lasted thirty years. If the humor came of its own accord and uninvited, I have allowed it a place in my sermon, but I was not writing the sermon for the sake of the humor. I should have written the sermon just the same, whether any humor applied for admission for admission for admission or not. I am saying these vain things in this frank way because I am a dead person speaking from the grave. Even I would be too modest to say them in life. I think we never become really and genuinely our entire and honest entire and honest entire and honest entire entire and perfectly honest SLC deleted ‘entire’ and inserted ‘perfectly honest’; then he deleted ‘perfectly’; Lyon inserted ‘entire and’ to match TS1 ribbon selves until we are dead—and not then until we have been dead years and years. People ought to start dead, and then they would be honest so much earlier. Among the letters awaiting me when I got back from New York was this one: Cleveland June 28 1906 1906 1906 [¶] Samuel L Clemens Esq New York City 1906. My dear Sir Having seen some letters of the late John Hay, copies of which I enclose, I am somewhat anxious to know the title of the piece mentioned, or whether it is printed in your published writings. Did you know Alexander Gunn, Gunn, Gunn Gunn, to whom Hay’s letters were addressed? An answer at your convenience will greatly oblige. Very truly yours Chas. Orr The letters referred to by Mr. Orr are the following: June 21 1880 Dear Gunn Are you in Cleveland for all this week? If you will say yes yes yets yes by return mail I have a masterpiece to submit to your consideration which is only in my hands for a few days. Yours, very much worritted by the depravity of Christendom, Hay Letter No. 2 No. 2 number two discloses Hay’s own high opinion of the effort and his deep concern for its safety. June 24 1880 My dear Gunn Here it is. It was written by Mark Twain in a serious effort to bring back our literature and philosophy to the sober and chaste Elizabethan standard. But the taste of taste of taskte of taste of taste of ‘te of’ rewritten over erased carbon imprint the present day is too corrupt for anything anything any thing anything ‘any thing’ marked to close up so classic. He has not yet been able even to find a publisher. The Globe has not yet recovered from Downey’s inroad, and they won’t touch it. I send it to you as one of the few lingering relics of that race of appreciative critics critics critics, critics who know a good thing when they see it. Read it with reverence and gratitude and send it back to me; for Mark is impatient to see once more his wandering offspring. Yours HAY No. 3 No. 3 Number three makes it quite clear that Gunn had confirmed the judgment of Hay. Washington DC July 7 1880 My dear Gunn I have your letter, and the proposition which you make to pull a few proofs of the masterpiece is highly attractive, and of course highly immoral. I cannot properly consent to it, and I am afraid the great man would think I was taking an unfair advantage of his confidence. Please send back the document as soon as you can, and if, in spite of my prohibition, you take these proofs, save me one. Very truly yours John Hay I replied to Mr. Orr as follows: Dublin, New Hampshire. July 30, 1906. Dear Mr. Orr: I cannot thank you enough for sending me copies of John Hay’s notes notes delicious notes to Mr. Gunn. In the matter of humor, what an unsurpassable touch John Hay had! I may have known Alexander Gunn in those ancient days, but the name does not sound familiar to me. The title of the piece is “1601.” The piece is a supposititious conversation which takes place in Queen Elizabeth’s closet in that year, between the Queen and Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakespeare , Ben Jonson, Francis Bacon, Beaumont, Sir Walter Raleigh, the Duchess of Bilgewater, and one or two others; and is not—as John Hay mistakenly supposes—“a serious effort to bring back our literature and philosophy to the sober and chaste Elizabethan standard;” no, the object was only a serious attempt to reveal to Rev. Joe Twichell the picturesqueness of parlor conversation in Elizabeth’s time; therefore if there is a decent or delicate or delicate or delicate word findable in it, it is because I overlooked it. I hasten to assure you that it is not printed in my published writings. “1601” was so be-praised by the archeological scholars of a quarter of a century ago, that I was rather inordinately vain of it. At that time it had been privately printed in several countries, among them Japan. A sumptuous edition on large paper, rough-edged, was made by Lieut. C. E. S. Wood at West Point—an edition of 50 copies—and distributed among popes and kings and such people. In England copies of that issue were worth 20 guineas when I was there six years ago, and none to be had. I thank you again, and am, Yours very truly, S. L. Clemens. Clemens. Clemens.” Dear me, but John Hay’s letters do carry me back over a long stretch of time! Joe Twichell’s head was black then; mine was brown. To-day both are as white and sparkly sparkly sparkley as a London footman’s. “1601” was a letter which I wrote to Twichell, about 1876, from my study at Quarry Farm one summer day when I ought to have been better employed. I remember the incident very well. I had been diligently reading up for a story which I was minded to write—“The Prince and the Pauper.” I was reading ancient English books with the purpose of saturating myself with archaic archaic archeological archaic English to a degree which would enable me to do plausible imitations of it in a fairly easy and unlabored way. In one of these old books I came across a brief conversation which powerfully impressed me, as I had never been impressed before, with the frank indelicacies of speech permissible among ladies and gentlemen in that ancient time. I was thus powerfully impressed because this conversation seemed real real real real ‘real’ underscored , whereas that kind of talk had not seemed real to me before. It had merely seemed Rabelaisian—exaggerated, artificial, made up by the author for his passing needs. It had not seemed to me that the blushful passages in Shakspeare were of a sort which Shakspeare had actually heard people use, but were inventions of his own— own— own—in the liberties which he had taken with the facts, under the protection of a poet’s license. But here at last was one of those dreadful conversations which commended itself to me as being absolutely real, and as being the kind of talk which ladies and gentlemen did actually indulge in in those pleasant and lamented ancient days now gone from us forever. I was immediately full of a desire to practise practise practice my archaics, and contrive one of those stirring conversations out of my own head. I thought I would practise practise practice on Twichell. I have always practised practised practiced doubtful things on Twichell from the beginning, thirty-nine years ago. So [¶] So ¶ So I contrived that meeting of the illustrious personages in Queen Elizabeth’s private parlor, and started a most picturesque and lurid and scandalous conversation between them. The Queen’s cup-bearer, a dried-up old nobleman, was present to take down the talk—not that he wanted to do it, but because it was the Queen’s desire and he had to. He loathed all those people because they were of offensively low birth, and because they hadn’t a thing to recommend them except their incomparable brains. He dutifully set down everything they said, and commented upon their words and their manners with bitter scorn and indignation. I put into the Queen’s mouth, and into the mouths of those other people, grossnesses not to be found outside of Rabelais, perhaps. I made their stateliest remarks reek with them, and all this was charming to me—delightful, delicious—but their charm was as nothing to that which was afforded me by that outraged old cup-bearer’s comments upon them. It is years since I have seen a copy of “1601.” I wonder if it would be as funny to me now now now as it was in those comparatively youthful days when I wrote it. It made a fat letter. I bundled it up and mailed it to Twichell in Hartford. And in the fall, when we returned to our home in Hartford and Twichell and I resumed the Saturday ten-mile walk to Talcott Tower and back, every Saturday, as had been our custom for years, we used to carry that letter along. There was a grove of hickory trees by the roadside, six miles out, and close by it was the only place in that whole region where the fringed gentian grew. On our return from the Tower we used to gather the gentians, then lie down on the grass upon the golden carpet of fallen hickory leaves and get out that letter and read it by the help of these poetical surroundings. We used to laugh ourselves lame and sore over the cup-bearer’s cup-bearer’s cup-bearer’s troubles. I wonder if we could laugh over them over them over them now? now? now.? period mended to a question mark now. We were so young then! then! then! —and maybe maybe may be there was not so much to laugh at in the letter as we thought there was. However, in the winter Dean Sage came to Twichell’s on a visit, visit, visit, and Twichell, who was never able to keep a secret when he knew it ought to be revealed, showed him the letter. Sage carried it off. He was greatly tickled with it himself, and he wanted to know how it might affect other people. He was under the seal of confidence, and could not show the letter to any one—still he wanted to try it on a dog, as the stage phrase is, and he dropped it in the aisle of the smoking-car accidentally, and sat down near-by to wait for results. The letter traveled traveled travelled from group to group around the car, car, car car, and when he finally went and claimed it, he was convinced that it possessed literary merit. So he got a dozen copies privately printed in Brooklyn. He sent one to David Gray, in Buffalo; one to a friend in Japan; one to Lord Houghton, in England; and one to a Jewish rabbi rabbi Rabbi in Albany, a very learned man and an able critic and lover of old-time literatures. “1601” was privately printed in Japan and in England, and by and by we began to hear from it. The learned rabbi rabbi Rabbi said it was a masterpiece in its verities and in its imitation of the obsolete English of Elizabeth’s day. And the praises delivered to me by the poet, David Gray, were very precious. He said “Put your name to it. Don’t be ashamed of it. It is a great and fine piece of literature and deserves to live, and will live. Your ‘Innocents Abroad’ will presently be forgotten, but this will survive. Don’t be ashamed; don’t be afraid. Leave the command in your will that your heirs shall put on your tombstone these words, and these alone: ‘He wrote the immortal “1601”.’” ‘He wrote the immortal “1601”.’ ” ‘He wrote the immortal 1601.’” ‘He wrote the immortal 1601.’ underscored When we sailed for Europe in 1891 1891 1901 1891 date queried and altered by Hobby; query canceled and correct date inserted by SLC 1901 1891 I left those sumptuous West Point copies hidden away in a drawer of my study, where I thought they would be safe. We were gone nearly ten years, and whenever anybody wanted a copy I promised it—the promise to be made good when we should return to America. In Berlin I promised one to Rudolph Lindau, of the Foreign Office. He still lives, but I have not been able to make that promise good. I promised one to Mommsen, and one to William Walter Phelps, who was our Minister at the Berlin court. These are dead, but maybe maybe may be they don’t miss “1601” where they are. When I I we I went lecturing around the globe I promised “1601” pretty liberally—these promises all to be made good when I I we I should return home. In 1890 I had published in Harper’s Monthly a sketch called “Luck,” the particulars of which had been furnished to Twichell by a visiting English army chaplain. The next year, in Rome, an English gentleman introduced himself to me on the street and said “Do you know who the chief figure in that ‘Luck’ ‘Luck’ “Luck” sketch is?” “No,” I said, “I don’t.” “Well,” he said, “it is Lord Wolseley—and don’t you go to England if you value your scalp.” In Venice another English gentleman said the same to me. These gentlemen said “Of course Wolseley is not to blame for the stupendous luck that has chased him up ever since he came shining out of Sandhurst in that most unexpected and victorious way, but he will recognize himself in that sketch, and so will everybody else, and if you venture into England he will destroy you.” In 1900, in London, I went to the Fourth of July banquet, arriving after eleven o’clock at night, at a time when the place was emptying itself. Choate was presiding. An English admiral was speaking, and some two or three hundred men were still present. I was to speak, and I moved along down behind the chairs which had been occupied by guests, toward Choate. These chairs were now empty. When I had reached within three chairs of Choate, a handsome man put out his hand and said “Stop. Sit down here. I want to get acquainted with you. I am Lord Wolseley.” I was falling, but he caught me, and I explained that I was often taken that way. We sat and chatted together and had a very good time—and he asked me for a copy of “1601,” and I was very glad to get off so easy. I said he should have it as soon as I reached home. We reached home the next year, and not a sign of those precious masterpieces could be found on the premises anywhere. And so all those promises remain unfulfilled to this day. Two or three days ago I found out that they have reappeared, and are safe in our house in New York. But I shall not make any of those promises good until I shall have had an opportunity to examine that masterpiece and see whether it really is a masterpiece or not. I have my doubts—though I had none a quarter of a century ago. In that day I believed “1601” was inspired.