1 February 1907 Friday, February 1, 1907 Friday, February 1, 1907 Friday, Feb. 1, 1907. Friday, Dictated Feb. 1, 1907. ‘Feb.’ underscored; dateline marked to precede ‘Last summer’ at 413.12 Cowboy’s fine letter to Helen Keller—Mr. Clemens comments upon such literature. Last summer I dictated some remarks upon a subject which I find myself unable to describe in a single phrase. I was talking about a letter twenty-seven years old, which had fallen into my hands by accident—a letter written by a western western Western girl who was in deep trouble—a moving letter, a pathetic letter, couched in wrecked and ruined grammar and spelling, but eloquent with the eloquence which comes from the heart, and is always imperial, whether it be clothed in rags or in cloth of gold; also I quoted and discussed a letter a quarter of a century old, written by Captain Ned Wakeman, spelt, punctuated, and constructed as only that extraordinary mariner could spell, punctuate, and construct— construct— construct— a letter out of his heart, and as rich in the eloquence of sincerity and feeling as was the western western Western girl’s. I also remarked upon a passage in Susy’s Biography Biography bBiography biography of me—a passage from her heart, and sweetly eloquent—and spelt as only Susy could spell. In this talk I was trying to show that when the heart speaks it has no use for the conventions; it can rise above them, and the result is literature literature literature ‘literature’ underscored , and not to be called by any less dignified name. I think I was also proposing to show that sometimes the productions of the unschooled mind get even get even get even ‘even get’ marked to transpose with ‘tr’ an added grace and power out of fresh and free and lawless grammar and orthography. If that was my position, I consider it strongly reinforced by a letter which has come to my hands this morning; it was written to Helen Keller something more than three years ago, at the time that she published her history of her life, and it came from a cowboy in the Far Far far West, whose spelling, grammar, and construction do most engagingly construction do most engagingly construction, do most engagingly set at easy and unembarrassed defiance all the laws that govern those artificialities; but the result is unqualifiedly satisfactory, just the same, and miles and miles above the reach of criticism; it comes out of a sound sound sound, good heart, and out of a most wise and level head, and is literature literature literature ‘literature’ underscored —and not commonplace literature, but literature of a high class; the architect of it the architect of it the architect of it is a thinker, an observer, a philosopher, and has also a touch of poetry in him: him: him,: he perceives why Helen is happy, and the reason for it; he has not failed to perceive that Miss Sullivan (Mrs. Macy,) (Mrs. Macy,) (Mrs. Macy,) not in is a wonderful woman, and, in her way, as wonderful as Helen herself. There is an irresistible charm about his simple and natural fashion of employing the technicalities of his trade in his reflections upon Helen and her teacher—those reflections wherein he shrewdly notes a mental kinship between Helen and the blind steer, and wherein he approves of Miss Sullivan’s theory as being right and judicious in the education of a colt—Helen being the colt; likewise a “bronco.” “bronco.” “bronco.” His interest and his sympathy sympathy symapthy proceed from his heart—that good heart which moved him to teach the little “Gurman” boy and girl “United States.” “United States.” “United States.” It will be noticed that some of his words and names get a deliciousness from his fresh and unconventional spellings of them which they never possessed before—for instance, his new rendering of Booker Washington’s patronymic. It is fine to see his great and just admiration of Miss Sullivan and her marvelous work; after he has signed his letter letter letter, he still has to come back to it in a postscript. And it is pleasant to see that he is his natural and incomparable self to the last, and doesn’t have to go away from home to find a telling figure whereby to express his thought. It is long since I have seen so delightful a letter as his; it is literature, high literature, and not to be successfully imitated by any art taught in the schools or known to the trained journeyman of the trade; it ranks away up side by side with Susy’s Biography and Captain Ned Wakeman’s letter. Read it. Read it. Read it, and be thankful for the privilege. Read it., and be thankful for the privilege. 16 Miles By. Elko, Nev. 16 Miles By. Elko, Nev. centered: Copy of Letter to Helen Keller. 16 Miles By. Elso, Nev. —— ——, ‘Copy of Letter to Helen Keller.’ underscored centered: Copy of Letter to Helen Keller. —— ——, centered: Copy of Letter to Helen Keller. —— ——, Nov. 29 1903. Miss Helen Keller Dear Friend I sent to Dubleday and Page, New York, for your book, and have just finished reading it. As I am batching and the Evenings drag I thought I rite you and tell you how very interesting your book is. I enjoyed reding it. And Miss Sulivan Letters are just fine. You seemd to be as Happy as all the rest of the Girls, you ought to be becose you cant see the Cloudy days. Reding your Book puts me in mind of a large Drove of Cattle I hurded one Sumer, there was a Blind 2 year Old Steer in the bunch and he seemed to do as well as the rest. he would go through the gates and timber and over Ruff places and would get lost from the rest. Iff the Wind was in the South he would feed on the North Side. and Vice Versey Vice Versey Vice x Versey . he was always out to one side and near the middle of the bunch. Iff he wanted to Get on the other side he would drop behind never go in Front. I used to watch him and wonder how he always new when I was close. But what we lack somebody else makes up, for instant a Eastern Man comes West and they call him a Tender Foot. And when a Western Man goes East they call him a Yap. I see in the Kansas City Star that the President of Harvard Coladge says when a Western Man goes East he ought to take a good Wash. He for gets that the Watter here is used up for Eregation. Some day in the future I expect you will rite another Book on your Life, Unless you get a Man. iff you do it will take your hole Life to Train him. Don’t you think it would be very interesting to your Readers to have a sketch on Miss Sullivan Life or rather on her Gurlhud days in your book you speak of her being being gbeing revised in pencil being nearly Blind. Id like to Reed of her parrents, I think she has don more for Education and the People than Miss Francis Wilard. She is a grand Woman and you ought to Sing her prases all of your Life. I think your little Black plamate plamate pamate plamate revised in pencil (Page transcript-unidentified); plamate Marthy Washington iff she had such a Woman as Miss Sulivan for a Teacher and Gardian her chance would of bin good to have bin a second Bucker Washington. I see in the paper that when that Duke told King Edward he was ingadged to Miss May Golet the King sed he was glad of it. He sed Ingland neded her money. Our country needs more Wimmen like your Teacher. She give up her prospects it seems of a home and famly to be a Teacher, and as a Teacher for the Blind she is surly next next neaxt next the top of the Lader. And she has kept you Climing Climing. Her theory of teaching Children is all rite I think I was Teaching a little Gurman Boy and Girl United States in S. Dakota and after reding Miss Sulivan letter I can see now that they lurned Inglish faster runing around the place with me than in School I broke Horses all my life and I think Miss Sulivan theory is all rite in a Colt let them lurn by Experence. I think when she went to Alabama and took charge of that little Bronco it proved it B. B. Page B. B. Page B. B. Page —— —— —— —— P.S. When Lue Dilen beet the World record at Memphis, Tenn, They didn forget to Name her Driver Driver Driver Driver ‘Driver’ underscored .