The Chicago G. A. R. Festival The Chicago G. A. R. Festival 1866. The Chicago G. A. R. Festival 1866. flush left 1866. centered on the next line The Chicago G. A. R. Festival. The ¶ The no ¶ The first time I ever saw General Grant was in the fall or winter of 1866 at one of the receptions at Washington, when he was General of the Army. I merely saw and shook hands with him along with along with along a general crowd but had no conversation. It was there also there also there, also, that I first saw General Sheridan. I next saw General Grant during his first term as President. President. President Senator Bill Stewart of Nevada Stewart of Nevada Stewart, of Nevada, proposed to take me in and see the President. We found him in his working costume costume costume, with an old short old short old. short, linen duster on on on, and it was well spattered with ink. I had had hasd acquired some trifle of notoriety through some letters which I had written written written, in the New York Tribune Tribune Tribune, during my trip round about the world in the Quaker City Quaker City Quaker City expedition. I shook hands and then there was a pause and silence. I couldn’t think of anything to say. So I merely looked into the General’s grim, immovable countenance a moment or two in silence two in silence two, in silence, and then I said: “Mr. President, I am embarrassed embarrassed embarassed —are you?” He smiled a smile which would have done no discredit to a cast-iron cast-iron castiron image, and I got away under the smoke of my volley. I did not see him again for some ten years. In the meantime I had become very thoroughly notorious. Then, in 1879 1879 1879, the General had just returned from his journey through the European and Asiatic world world world, and his progress from San Francisco eastward San Francisco eastward San Francisco, eastward, had been one continuous ovation ovation ovation: and now he was to be feasted in Chicago by the veterans of the Army of the Tennessee—the first army over which he had had command. The preparations for this occasion were in keeping with the importance of it. The toast committee telegraphed me and asked me if I would be present and respond at the grand banquet to the toast to the ladies. I telegraphed back that the toast was worn out. Everything had been said about the ladies that could be said at a banquet, banquet, banquet, but but but that there was one class of the community that had always been overlooked upon such occasions and and and that if they would allow me I would take that class for a toast: “The Babies.” “The Babies.” The Babies. They were willing—so I prepared my toast and went out to Chicago. There was to be a prodigious procession. General Grant was to review it from a rostrum which had been built out for the purpose from the second story window of the Palmer House. The rostrum was carpeted and otherwise glorified with flags and so on. The best place of all to see the procession was of course was of course was, of course, from this rostrum. So I sauntered upon that rostrum while as yet it was empty in the hope that I might be permitted to sit there. It was rather a conspicuous place, place, place, since upon it the public gaze was fixed, and there was a countless multitude below. Presently two gentlemen came upon that platform from the window of the hotel hotel house hotel and stepped forward to the front. A prodigious shout went up from the vast multitude below, and I recognized in one of these two gentlemen General Grant. The other was Carter Harrison, Harrison, Harrison the mayor of Chicago, with whom I was acquainted. He saw me, stepped over to me me me, and said wouldn’t I like to be introduced to the General? I said, I should. So So As So he walked over with me and said, “General, “General, “General let me introduce Mr. Mr. Mr Clemens,” Clemens,” Clemens,” and we we We shook hands. There was the usual momentary pause and then the General said: “I am not embarrassed embarrassed embarassed —are you?” It showed that he had a good memory for trifles as well as for serious things. That banquet was by all odds the most notable one I was ever present at. There were six hundred six hundred 600 persons present, mainly veterans of the Army of the Tennessee, Tennessee, Tennessee and that in itself would have made it a most notable occasion of the kind in my experience but there were other things which contributed. General Sherman and in fact nearly all of the surviving great Generals of the war sat in a body on a dais round about General Grant. The speakers were of a rare celebrity and ability. That night I heard for the first time a slang expression which had already come into considerable vogue but I had not myself heard it before. When the speaking began about ten o’clock I left my place at the table and went away over to the front side of the great dining room where I could take in the whole spectacle at one glance. Among others, Colonel Vilas Colonel Vilas Col. Villas was to respond to a toast and also Colonel Colonel Col. Ingersoll, the silver-tongued infidel, who had begun life in Illinois, and was exceedingly popular there. Vilas Vilas Villas was from Wisconsin and was very famous as an orator. He had prepared himself superbly for this occasion. He was about the first speaker on the list of fifteen toasts and Bob Ingersoll was the ninth. I had taken a position upon the steps in front of the brass band, band, band, which lifted me up and gave me a good general view. Presently Presently Presently, I noticed, leaning against the wall near me, a simple-looking young man man man, wearing the uniform of a private and the badge of the Army of the Tennessee. He seemed to be nervous and ill at ease about something. Presently something. Presently something.— Presently , while the second speaker was talking, this young man said: “Do you know Colonel Vilas Colonel Vilas Col. Villas ?” I said I had been introduced to him. He sat silent a while and then said: “They say he is hell when he gets started!” I said: “In what way? What do you mean?” “Speaking! Speaking! They say he is lightning lightning lightening !” “Yes,” I said, “I have heard that he is a great speaker.” The young man shifted about uneasily for a while while while, and then he said: “Do you reckon he can get away with Bob Ingersoll?” I said: “I don’t know.” Another pause. Occasionally Occasionally Occasionally, he and I would join in the applause when a speaker was on his legs, but this young man seemed to applaud unconsciously. Presently he said, “Here in Illinois Here in Illinois Here, in Illinois, we think there can’t nobody nobody no body get away with Bob Ingersoll.” I said: “Is that so?” He said, “Yes: we don’t think anybody can lay over Bob Ingersoll.” Then he added sadly, “But they do say that Vilas Vilas Villas is pretty nearly hell.” At last last last, Vilas Vilas Villas rose to speak, and this young man pulled himself together and put on all his anxiety. Vilas Vilas Villas began to warm up and the people began to applaud. He delivered delivered delivered himself of one especially fine passage and there was a general shout: “Get up on the table! Get up on the table! Stand up on the table! We can’t see you!” you!” you!” So a lot of men standing there picked Vilas Vilas Villas up and stood him on the table in full view of the whole great audience audience audience, and he went on with his speech. The young man applauded with the rest, and I could hear the young fellow mutter without being able to make out what he said. But presently But presently But, presently, when Vilas Vilas Villas thundered out something something some thing especially fine, fine, fine, there was a tremendous outburst from the whole house house house, and then this young man said in a sort of despairing way: “It ain’t no use: Bob can’t climb up to that!” During the next hour he held his position against the wall in a sort of dazed abstraction, apparently unconscious of place or of anything anything any thing else, and at last when Ingersoll mounted the supper table his worshipper merely straightened up to an attitude of attention but without manifesting any hope. Ingersoll Ingersoll Ingersoll, with his fair and fresh complexion, handsome figure and graceful carriage was beautiful to look at. He was to respond to the toast of “The Volunteers,” “The Volunteers,” “The Volunteers,” and his first sentence or two showed his quality. As his third sentence fell from his lips the house let go with a crash, and my private looked pleased and for the first time hopeful but he had been too much but he had been too much but he had been too much frightened to join in the applause. Presently, when Ingersoll came to the passage in which he said that these volunteers had had and had shed their blood and perilled their lives in order that a mother might own her own child, child, child, the language was so fine, whatever it was, for I have forgotten, for I have forgotten, (for I have forgotten,) and the delivery was so superb that the vast multitude rose as one man and stood on their feet, shouting, shouting, shouting, stamping, and filling all the place with such a waving of napkins that it was like a snow storm. This prodigious outburst continued for a minute or two, Ingersoll standing and waiting. And now I happened to notice my private. He was stamping, clapping, shouting, shouting, shoutingges gesticulating gesticulating gesticulating, like a man who had gone truly mad. At last last last, when quiet was restored once more, he glanced up to me with the tears in his eyes and said: “Egod! He didn’t get left!” My own speech was granted the perilous perilous perillous distinction of the place of honor. It was the last speech on the list, an honor which no person, probably, has ever sought. It was not reached until two two 2 o’clock in the morning. But when I got on my feet I knew that there was at any rate one point in my favor: the text was bound to have the sympathy of nine-tenths of the men present present present, and of every woman, married woman, married woman, married, or single, of the crowds of the sex who stood huddled in the various doorways. I expected the speech to go off well—and it did. In it I had a drive at General General Gen. Sheridan’s comparatively comparatively comparitively new twins and various other things calculated to make it go. There was only one thing in it that I had fears about, and that one thing stood where it could not be removed in case of disaster. It was the last sentence in the speech. I had been picturing the America of fifty years hence, with a population of two hundred million souls, souls, souls and was saying that the future President, Admirals Admirals Admiralgenerals, and so forth forth forth, of that great coming time time time, were now lying in their various cradles, cradles, cradles, scattered abroad over the vast expanse of this country, country, country, and then said “And now in his cradle somewhere under the flag the future illustrious Commander-in-Chief Commander-in-Chief Commander in Chief of the American armies is so little burdened with his approaching grandeur and responsibilities as to be giving his whole strategic mind at this moment to trying to find out some way to get his big toe into his mouth—something, meaning no disrespect to the illustrious guest of this evening, evening, evening, which he turned his entire attention to some fifty-six fifty-six fifty six years ago”— And here, here, here, as I had expected, expected, expected, the laughter ceased ceased ceased; and a sort of shuddering silence took its place—for this was apparently carrying the matter too far. I I (I waited a moment or two to let this silence sink well home. home. home) Then, turning toward the General I added: “And if the child is but the father of the man there are mighty few who will doubt that he succeeded.” Which relieved the house: for house: for house: for when they saw the General break up in good-sized good-sized good sized pieces they followed suit with great enthusiasm.