8 March 1906 Thursday, March 8, 1906 The Barnard lecture—Subject Morals—Letter from brother of Captain Toncray Captain Toncray Capt. Tonkray —Mr. Clemens replied that original of “Huckleberry Finn” was Tom Blankenship Blankenship Blankinship Blankienship —Tom’s father Town Drunkard—Describes Tom’s character—Death of Injun Joe—Storm which came that night—Incident of the Episcopal sextons and their reforms—Mr. Dawson’s school in Hannibal—Arch Fuqua’s great gift. It turned out just so. It was an affectionate and hilarious good time. Miss Taylor, and two other charming girls, conveyed me from this house—corner of 9th street street Street and Fifth Avenue—to the College College College college by way of Central Park and Riverside Drive, and properly petted me and flattered me all the way, in accordance with the conditions which I had already exacted of Miss Taylor and Mrs. (Professor) Lord—these conditions being that I must be caressed and complimented all the way. Miss Russell, President of Barnard, is young and beautiful. I found in the Dean, Miss Hill, an acquaintance of many years ago, when she was a junior junior Junior in Smith College. We three went on the stage together. The floor and the gallery were compactly jammed with the youth and beauty and erudition of Barnard—a satisfying spectacle to look at. I put my watch on the table and kept game myself, allowing myself an hour. I lectured upon Morals; and earnestly, imploringly, and even pathetically, inculcated them and urged them upon those masses of girls—along with illustrations—more illustrations than than them than than morals—and I never knew so grave a subject to create so much noise before. A reception followed. I had the privilege of shaking hands with all of them, and was flattered to my content, and told them so. They all said that my lessons had gone home to them and that from now on they should lead a better life. For For For Dictated, March 8, 1906. For Dictated, March 8, 1906. For thirty years, I have received an average of a dozen letters a year from strangers who remember me, or whose fathers remember me as boy and young man. But these letters are almost always disappointing. I have not known these strangers nor their fathers. I have not heard of the names they mention; the reminiscences reminiscences remininscences reminiscences to which they call my attention my attention my attention attention have had no part in my experience; all of which means that these strangers have been mistaking me for somebody else. But at last I have the refreshment, this morning, of a letter from a man who deals in names that were familiar to me in my boyhood. The writer encloses a newspaper clipping which has been wandering through the press for four or five weeks, and he wants to know if his brother, Captain Toncray, was really the original of “Huckleberry Finn.” his brother, Captain Toncray, . . . Finn.” his brother, Capt. Tonkray, . . . Finn.” his brother, Capt. Tonkray, was really reputed in the West as the original of “Huckleberry Finn.,” Capt. Tonkray, lately deceased, was (as stated in the clipping), the original of “Huckleberry Finn.” Capt. Tonkray, lately deceased, was (as stated in the clipping), the original of “Huckleberry Finn.” Capt. Tonkray, lately deceased, was (as stated in the clipping) the original of “Huckleberry Finn.” “HUCKLEBERRY FINN” DEAD. Original of Mark Twain’s Famous Famous Famous Famous Famous Character Had Led Quiet Life in Idaho. [by direct wire to the times.] WALLACE (Idaho) Feb. 2.—[Exclusive Dispatch.] Capt. A. O. Toncray Toncray Tonkray , commonly known as “Huckleberry Finn,” said to be the original of Mark Twain’s famous character, was found dead in his room at Murray Murray Murray Murray box drawn around ‘urray’ to indicate a temporary suppression this morning from heart failure. Capt. Toncray Capt. Toncray “Capt. Tonkray Capt. Tonkray , a native of Hannibal, Mo., was 65 years old. In early life, he ran on steamboats on the Mississippi and the Missouri rivers, in frequent contact with Samuel L. L. S. L. Clemens, and tradition has it “Mark Twain” later used Toncray Toncray Tonkray as his model for “Huckleberry Finn.” He came to Murray in 1884 1884 1884 not in (1884) typed in the margin and had been living a quiet life since. “HUCKLEBERRY FINN” . . . since. “HUCKLEBERRY FINN” . . . since. “ ‘Huckleberry Finn’ . . . since.” ‘Huckleberry Finn.’ . . . since. text from the Times circled and ‘Leave out.’ written in the margin I have replied that “Huckleberry Finn” was Tom Blankenship. Tom Blankenship. Tom Blankienship. Tom Blankenship. Jack. Frank F. Frank F. As this inquirer inquirer writer writer inquirer inquirer evidently knew the Hannibal of the ’40s ‘40s forties , he will easily recall Tom Blankenship. Tom Blankenship. Tom Blankienship. Tom Blankenship. Frank. Frank. Tom’s Tom’s Tom’s Tom’s Frank’s Frank’s father was at one time Town Drunkard, an exceedingly well defined well defined well defined well-defined and unofficial office of those days. He succeeded “General” Gaines, “General” Gaines, General—(I forget the General’s name) —(I forget the General’s name) “General” Gaines, “General” Gaines, and for a time he was sole and only incumbent of the office; but afterward Jimmy Jimmy Jimmiey Jimmy Finn proved competency and disputed the place with him, so we had two town-drunkards town-drunkards town drunkards at one time—and it made as much trouble in that village as Christendom experienced in the fourteenth century fourteenth century 14th Century 14th fourteenth Ccentury ‘C’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘lc’ fourteenth century when there were two Popes at the same time. In “Huckleberry Finn” I have drawn Tom Blankenship Tom Blankenship Tom Blankienship Tom Blankenship Frank Frank exactly as he was. He was ignorant, unwashed, insufficiently fed; but he had as good a heart as ever any boy had. His liberties were totally unrestricted. He was the only really independent person—boy or man—in the community, and by consequence he was tranquilly and continuously happy, and was envied by all the rest of us. We liked him; we enjoyed his society. And as his society was forbidden us by our parents, the prohibition trebled and quadrupled its value, and therefore we sought and got more of his society than of any other boy’s. I heard, four years ago, that he was Justice of the Peace in a remote village in Montana, Montana, Montana, Montana, the State of ——, insertion by SLC, comma added by Munro the State of ——, and was a good citizen and greatly respected. During Jimmy Jimmy Jimmiey Jimmy Finn’s term he he he he (Jimmy) he (Jimmy) (Jimmy) was not exclusive; he was not finical; he was not hypercritical; he was largely and handsomely democratic democratic democratic, democratic —and slept in the deserted tan-yard with the hogs. My father tried to reform him once, but did not succeed. My father was not a professional reformer. In him the spirit of reform was spasmodic. It only broke out now and then, with considerable intervals between. Once he tried to reform Injun Joe. That also was a failure. It was a failure, and we boys were glad. For Injun Joe, drunk, was interesting and a benefaction to us, but Injun Joe, sober, was a dreary spectacle. We watched my father’s experiments upon him with a good deal of anxiety, but it came out all right and we were satisfied. Injun Joe got drunk oftener than before, and became intolerably interesting. I think that in “Tom Sawyer” “Tom Sawyer” Tom Sawyer “Tom Sawyer” I starved Injun Joe to death in the cave. But that may have been to meet the exigencies of romantic literature. I can’t remember now whether he he the real Injun Joe revised in ink the real Injun Joe died in the cave or out of it, but I do remember that the news of his death reached me at a most unhappy time—that is to say, just at bedtime on a summer night when a prodigious storm of thunder and lightning accompanied by a deluging rain that turned the streets and lanes into rivers, rivers, rivers, and rivers, caused me to repent and resolve to lead a better life. I can remember those awful thunder-bursts thunder-bursts thunder-bursts thunder-bursts and the white glare of the lightning yet, and the wild lashing of the rain against the window-panes. By my teachings I perfectly well knew what all the wild riot riot rumpus rumpus riot riot was for—Satan had come to get Injun Joe. I had no shadow of doubt about it. It was the proper thing when a person like Injun Joe was required in the underworld underworld under world , and I should have thought it strange and unaccountable if Satan had come for him in a less impressive impressive spectacular spectacular impressive way. With every glare of lightning I shriveled shriveled shriveled shrivelled and shrunk together in mortal terror, and in the interval of black darkness that followed I poured out my lamentings over my lost condition, condition, condition, condition, and my supplications for just one more chance, with an energy and feeling and sincerity quite foreign to my nature. But in the morning I saw that it was a false alarm and concluded to resume business at the old stand and wait for another reminder. The axiom says “History repeats itself.” A week or two ago my nephew, by marriage, Edward Loomis, dined with us, along with his wife, my niece (née Julie Langdon). He is Vice-President of the Delaware and Lackawanna Railway system. The duties of his office used to carry him frequently to Elmira, New York; the exigencies of his courtship carried him there still oftener, and so in the course of time he came to know a good many of the citizens of that place. my nephew, by marriage, Edward Loomis, . . . née . . . place. my nephew, by marriage, Edward Loomis, . . . nee . . . place. my nephew, by marriage, Edward Loomis, . . . neée . . . place. Mr. Blank-Blank dined with us. accent added Mr. Blank-Blank dined with us. At dinner he mentioned a circumstance which flashed me back over about sixty years and landed me in that little bedroom on that tempestuous night, and brought to my mind how creditable to me was my conduct through that that that the whole night, night, night— night—, night, and how barren it was of moral spot or fleck during that entire period: he period: he period. He period.: he He period mended to a colon period: he said Mr. Buckly Buckly Buckly Buckly X X was sexton, or something, of the Episcopal church in Elmira, Elmira, Elmira, his town, Elmira, his town, and had been for many years the competent superintendent of all the church’s worldly affairs, and was regarded by the whole congregation as a stay, a blessing, a priceless treasure. But he had a couple of defects—not large defects, but they seemed large when flung against the background of his profoundly religious character: character: character—: character: he drank a good deal, and he could outswear a brakeman. A movement arose to persuade him to lay aside these vices, and after consulting with his pal, who occupied the same position as himself in the other Episcopal church, and whose defects were duplicates of his own and had inspired regret in the congregation congregation congregation whom congregation whom congregation he was serving, they concluded to try for reform—not wholesale, but half at a time. They took the liquor pledge and waited for results. During nine days the results were entirely satisfactory, and they were recipients of many compliments and much congratulation. Then on New Year’s Eve New Year’s Eve New Year’s Eve New-year’s eve they had business a mile and a half out of town, just beyond the New York New York New York New York not in State line. Everything went well with them that evening in the bar-room of the inn inn Inn Iinn inn —but at last the celebration of the occasion by those villagers came to be of a burdensome nature. It was a bitter cold night and the multitudinous hot toddies that were circulating began by and by began by and by began, by and by, began, by and by, began by and by to exert a powerful influence upon the new prohibitionists. At last Buckly’s Buckly’s Buckly’s Buckly’s X’s X’s friend remarked, “Buckly, remarked, ¶ “Buckly, remarked, no ¶ “Buckly, remarked, ¶ “Buckly, “X, remarked, ¶ “X, does it occur to you that we are outside the diocese?” That outside the diocese?” ¶ That outside the diocese.” no ¶ That outside the diocese?” ¶ That ‘outside the diocese?’ underscored outside the diocese?” ¶ That ended reform No. 1. Then no ¶ Then ¶ Then no ¶ Then they took a chance in reform No. 2. For a while that one prospered, and they got much applause. I now reach the incident which sent me back a matter of sixty years, as I have remarked a while ago. One morning this step-nephew of mine, Loomis, met Buckly morning . . . Buckly morning . . . Buckly morning this step-nephew of mine, Loomis, met Buckly Mr. Blank-Blank met X morning Mr. Blank-Blank met X on the street and said, “You said, ¶ “You said no ¶ “You said, ¶ “You have made a gallant struggle against those defects of yours. I am aware that you failed on No. 1, but I am also aware that you are having better luck with No. 2.” “Yes,” Buckly said, Buckly said, Buckly said Buckly X said, X said; “No. 2 is all right and sound up to date, and we are full of hope.” Loomis said, Loomis said, Loomis said Blank-Blank Loomis said, Blank-Blank said, “Buckly, Buckly, Buckley, Buckly, X, X, of course you have your troubles like other people, but they never show on the outside. I have never seen you when you were not cheerful. Are you always cheerful? Really always cheerful?” “Well, no no no no, ” he said, “no, no, No Nno, no, I can’t say that I am always cheerful, but— well, but— well, except—but— □well symbol for an em-space but— —well, but—well, you know that kind of a night that comes: say—you comes: say—you comes; you comes,: say—you comes: say—you wake up ’way ’way way ’way ’way in the night and the whole world is sunk in gloom and there are storms and earthquakes and all sorts of disasters in the air threatening, threatening, threatening threatening, threatening, and you get cold and clammy; clammy; chill; chill; clammy; clammy; and when that happens to me I recognize how sinful I am and it all goes all goes goes all goes all goes ‘goes all’ marked to transpose with ‘tr’ all goes clear to my heart and wrings it and I have such terrors and terrors!— terrors!— terrors— terrors!— terrors!— oh oh oh oh, they are indescribable, those terrors that assail and thrill me assail and thrill me assail and thrill me assail me , and I slip out of bed and get on my knees and pray and pray and pray and promise that I will will will will ‘will’ underscored will be good, if I can only have another chance. if I can only have another chance. etc. etc. if I can only have another chance. if I can only have another chance. And then, you know, in the morning the sun shines out so lovely, so lovely, so lovely so lovely, ‘so’ underscored so lovely, and the birds sing and the whole world is so beautiful, and—b’ God I rally!” b’ God I rally!” b’y God I rally!” b’ God, I rally!” ‘b’ God, I rally!” ’ underscored by SLC, comma inserted by Munro b’ God, I rally!” Now I will quote a brief paragraph from this letter which I have received from Mr. Toncray. He received from Mr. Toncray. He received from Mr. Tonkray. He received from Mr. Tonkray. He a minute ago spoken of. The writer a minute ago spoken of. The writer says: You You “You You no doubt are at a loss to know who I am. I will tell you. In my younger days I was a resident of Hannibal, Mo., and you and I were schoolmates attending Mr. Dawson’s school along with Sam and Will Bowen Bowen Bowen Bowen and Andy Fuqua and others whose names I have forgotten. I was then about the smallest boy in school, for my age, and they called me little Aleck Toncray Toncray Tonkray Tonkray not in for short. short. short.” short. I don’t don’t don’t don’t only dimly only dimly remember Aleck Toncray, Aleck Toncray, Aleck Tonkray, Aleck Tonkray, him, him, but I knew those other people as well as I knew the town-drunkards town-drunkards town drunkard s town drundkards . I remember Dawson’s schoolhouse perfectly. If I wanted to describe it I could save myself the trouble by conveying the description of it to these pages from “Tom Sawyer.” I can remember the drowsy and inviting summer sounds that used to float in through the open windows from that distant boy-paradise distant boy-paradise boys’ distant boy-Paradise distant boy-Paradise , Cardiff Hill, (Holliday’s Hill,) Cardiff Hill, (Holliday’s Hill,) Cardiff Hill, Cardiff Hill, (Holliday’s Hill,), SLC inserted ‘(Holliday’s Hill,)’; Munro canceled the comma after the first ‘Hill’ and moved the second comma to follow the close parenthesis Cardiff Hill (Holliday’s Hill), and mingle with the murmurs of the studying pupils and make them the more dreary by the contrast. I remember Andy Fuqua, the oldest pupil—a man of twenty-five. I remember the youngest pupil, Nannie Owsley, a child of seven. I remember George Robards, eighteen or twenty years old, the only pupil who studied Latin. I remember—in some cases vividly, in others vaguely—the —in some cases vividly, in others vaguely—the vaguely the vaguely the —in some cases vividly, in others vaguely—the —in some cases vividly, in others vaguely—the rest of the twenty-five boys and girls. I remember Mr. Dawson very well. I remember his boy, Theodore, who was as good as he could be. In fact fact fact fact, he was inordinately good, extravagantly good, offensively good, detestably good—and he had pop-eyes—and I would have drowned him if I had had a chance. In that school we were all about on an equality, and, so far as I remember, the passion of envy had no place in our hearts, except in the case of Arch Fuqua—the other one’s brother. Of course we all went barefoot in the summertime summertime summertime summer-time . Arch Fuqua was about my own age—ten or eleven. In the winter we could stand him, because he wore shoes then, and his great gift was hidden from our sight and we were enabled to forget it. But in the summertime summertime summertime summer-time he was a bitterness to us. He was our envy, for he could double back his big toe and let it fly and you could hear it snap thirty yards. There was not another boy in the school that could approach this feat. He had not a rival as regards a physical distinction—except in Theodore Eddy, who could work his ears like a horse. But he was no real rival, because you couldn’t hear him work his ears; so all the advantage lay with Arch Fuqua. I am not done with Dawson’s school; I will return to it in a later chapter. ¶ I . . . chapter. not in ¶ I . . . chapter. ¶ I . . . chapter.