5 October 1906 Friday, October 5, 1906 Authorship of the two letters concerning San Francisco sufferers traced to Miss Grace Donworth—Letter from Miss Anne Stockbridge. Several weeks ago I injected into one of these chapters a couple of odd and comical letters concerning a contribution of clothing for the sufferers by the San Francisco catastrophe. The spelling was painstakingly bad, therefore suspiciously bad; but the neighbor who gave me the copies was able to vouch for their genuineness. He is a man whose word is above reproach, and so I was obliged to believe the letters genuine and I did believe it. I I I ‘I’ underscored was satisfied, but my mind, fussing at the matter independently while I was busy with other things, wasn’t. It disturbed me with one protest after another, until I asked my neighbor to take measures to reinforce his verification of the genuineness of the letters. He did so. He interviewed the gentleman who had furnished the copies, and he said he knew them to be genuine for his sister had given them to him with the positive assertion that they were of that character. I used one of them in a speech before the Associated Press, the other night, in New York, and in the speech I, in my turn, vouched for the genuineness of the document. The speech was published, and one of the results of the publication is the following letter, which arrived a day or two ago. Stockbridge Hall Yarmouth, Me. Sept. 27. 1906. My dear Mr. Clemens, I am the “dear friend” in the letter handed to you lately by Mr. S. B. Pearmain, who tells me that the names of the sender and receiver were cut out by him. If they had not been cut out the letter would have been written by “Jennie Allen” to “Miss Anny Anny Anny Amnny Stokbridge.” When I let Mr. Pearmain have my letters, through my brother, Mr. Stockbridge of the University Club, Boston, to show you, neither my brother nor I expected they would be published in any paper. My brother tells me that he told Mr. Pearmain that if they were to be shown to any considerable number of people it would be better to have the names suppressed. I find, however, in the issue of the New York Times for September twentieth the first letter complete with the exception of the names. I thought it was a most fitting and appropriate subject for your discussion at the Associated Press Co. dinner, but how do you think “Jennie” would like it, if she chanced to see the paper? After the receipt of letter number two, a friend wrote asking “Jennie” to go to Maine for the summer. I am going to have a fotograf copy of that one which I should like to send to you. It is in some respects funnier than the others, and only a fotograf copy can do justice to the cacography cacography chirography cacography cacography and the ornamentation. ornamentation. ornamentation, for instance Jennie Allen (this is as nearly as I can copy it) signature simulated; three curvy designs drawn by Stockbridge ornamentation. I then thought I would call on “Jennie.” I had become quite interested in her, but on consulting my street directory, I was dismayed to find there was no such street in Providence. My next shock came when I had returned to me, from the Dead Letter office, a letter addressed to “Jennie” with the remark “No such person to be found.” This happened, you understand, after I had allowed my brother to lend the letters to Mr. Pearmain. I was now now notw thoroughly aroused, and went over my list of friends to see if any one of them could have been bright enough to write these letters which had been accepted as genuine by scores of people to whom I had read them. At last last last, I hit upon a lady lady lady, from Machias, Maine, Miss Grace Donworth, who had been at the “Armerry” with me while we were collecting the clothing for the Californians. She heard me read the first letter and also heard me say I had written to “Jennie.” Also as good fortune would have it some one did call for me at the Armory who was a stranger to every one. I was not there at the time, time, time, so you see see see, I was deceived myself. At first Miss Donworth was non-committal but at last acknowledged the authorship and has since sent me some notes, continuing Jennie’s story, which are irresistibly funny, and which bring in other characters such as one runs across in Maine. . . . . Very truly yours, Anne W. Stockbridge. 257 Benefit St. St. St. St., Providence, R.I. It shows that the human race doesn’t change, but remains as easily deceived and as eager to be deceived as it always was. If I remember rightly, Chatterton deceived Horace Walpole with his Rowley inventions, and he would as certainly have deceived you and me with them. The Ireland forgeries were accepted by astute Shaksperean Shaksperean Shaksperian scholars in a past generation, and their like would win the suffrage of Shaksperean Shaksperean Shaksperian scholars to-day to-day to-day . In very truth, “Jennie’s” over-elaborated, inartistic, and unscientific forgeries ought not to have deceived anybody, for now that we know them to be fakes we promptly perceive that there is little or no plausibility about them; yet they deceived the scores of persons to whom they were shown. The Book of Mormon, engraved upon metal plates, was dug up out of the ground in some out-of-the-way out-of-the-way out of the way corner of Canada Canada the State of New York Canada the State of New York Canada by Joseph Smith, a man of no repute and of no authority, and upon this extravagantly doubtful document the Mormon Church Church church was built, and upon it stands to-day to-day to-day and flourishes. “Science and Health” was sent down from heaven to Mother Eddy, after having been sent up there by Brother Quimby, and upon “Science and Health” stands the great and growing and prosperous Christian Science Church Church church to-day. Evidently one of the least difficult things in the world, to-day, is to humbug the human race. “Jennie’s” letters are an innocent fraud, and a quite justifiable one, since they make pleasant reading and can harm no one. They are to be multiplied and a book is to be made of them. It may be that the book will prosper better as a genuine work than as a fake, and so I will keep the secret by not publishing this chapter at the present time.