16 March 1906 Friday, March 16, 1906 title Friday, March 16, 1906 Friday, March 16, 1906. Friday, Dictated March 16, 1906.‘March’ underscored [Dictated March 16, 1906.] Schoolmates of sixty years sixty years 60 yrs. ago—Mary Miller, one of Mr. Clemens’s first sweethearts—Artimisia Briggs, another—Mary Lacy, another— Jimmy Jimmy Jimmie McDaniel, to whom Mr. Clemens told his first humorous story— Mr. Richmond, Sunday-school teacher, afterwards owner of Tom Sawyer’s cave, which is now being ground into cement—Hickman, the showy young captain—Reuel Gridley Gridley Gridley, Gridley and the sack of flour incident—The Levin Jew boys called Twenty-two—George George Geo. Butler, nephew of Ben Butler—The incident of getting into bed with Will Bowen Bowen Bowen Bowen to catch the measles, and the successful and nearly fatal case which resulted. We will return to those school children school children school children school-children of sixty years ago. I recall Mary Miller. She was not my first sweetheart, but I think she was the first one that furnished me a broken heart. 1845 1845 not in 1845 inserted and boxed in the margin (1845.) inset I fell in love with her when she was eighteen and I was nine, was nine, nine— was nine, deemed a revision by SLC on the missing NAR 23pf but she scorned me, and I recognized that this was a cold world. I had not noticed that temperature before. I believe I was as miserable as even even not in even even a grown man could be. But I think that this sorrow did not remain with me long. As I remember it, I soon transferred my worship to Artimisia Briggs, who was a year older than Mary Miller. When I revealed my passion to her she did not scoff at it. She did not make fun of it. She was very kind and gentle about it. But she was also firm, and said she did not want to be pestered by children. And there was Mary Lacy. She was a schoolmate. But she also was out of my class because of her advanced age. She was pretty wild and determined and independent. She was ungovernable, and was considered incorrigible. But that was all a mistake. She She . . . incorrigible. But that was all a mistake. She She . . . incorrigible. But that was all a mistake. She She . . . incorrigible. But that was all a mistake. Sshe But she married, and at once settled down and became in all ways a model matron and was as highly respected as any matron in the town. Four years ago she was still living, and had been married fifty years. Jimmy Jimmy Jimmie McDaniel was another schoolmate. His age and mine about tallied. His father kept the candy shop candy shop candy shop candy-shop and he was the most envied little chap in the town—after Tom Blankenship (“Huck Finn”)— Blankenship (“Huck Finn”)— Blankienship— Blankenship— (“Huck Finn”)— Blankenship (“Huck Finn”)— for although we never saw him eating candy, we supposed that it was, nevertheless, his ordinary diet. He pretended that he never ate it, and and not in and and didn’t care for it because there was nothing forbidden about it—there was plenty of it and he could have as much of it as he wanted. Still there was circumstantial evidence that suggested that he only scorned candy in public to show off, for he had the worst teeth in town. Still . . . town. Still . . . town. Still . . . town. written in the margin, in pencil: ‘This man is still alive.’ not in He was the first human being to whom I ever told a humorous story, so far as I can remember. This was about Jim Wolf Wolf Wolfe and the cats; and I gave him that tale the morning after that memorable episode. I thought he would laugh his remaining remaining remaining remaining not in teeth out. I had never been so proud and happy before, and I I I not in have seldom been so proud and happy since. I saw him four years ago when I was out there. He was working in a cigar-making shop. He . . . shop. He . . . shop. He . . . shop. not in He wore an apron that came down to his knees and a beard that came nearly half as far, an apron . . . half as far, an . . . half way as far, an apron . . . half as far, a beard, gray and venerable, that came half way down to his knees, a beard, gray and venerable, that came half-way down to his knees, and yet it was not difficult for me to recognize him. He had been married fifty-four years. He had many children and grandchildren and great-grandchildren, and also even posterity, they all said—thousands—yet the boy to whom I had told the cat story when we were callow juveniles callow juveniles fourteen years old fourteen years old callow juveniles callow juveniles was still present in that cheerful little old man. Artimisia Briggs got married not long after refusing me. She married Richmond, the stone mason, stone mason, plasterer, stone mason, stone mason, who was my Methodist Sunday-school teacher in the earliest days, and he had one distinction which I envied him: at him: at him:— —no, he was not the plasterer, he was the stone mason. At him: at some time or other he had hit his thumb with his hammer and the result was a thumb-nail thumb-nail thumb-nail thumb nail which remained permanently twisted and distorted and curved and pointed, pointed, pointed and long, pointed, and long, pointed, like a parrot’s parrot’s bird of prey’s bird of prey’s parrot’s parrot’s beak. I should not consider it an ornament now, I suppose, I suppose, not in I suppose, I suppose, but it had a fascination for me then, and a vast value, because it was the only one in the town. He was a very kindly and considerate Sunday-school teacher, and patient and compassionate, so he was the favorite teacher with us little chaps. In that school they had slender oblong oblong oblong oblong pasteboard blue tickets, each with a verse from the Testament printed on it, and you could get a blue ticket by reciting two verses. By reciting five verses you could get three blue tickets, and you could trade these at the bookcase and borrow a book for a week. I was under Mr. Richmond’s spiritual care every now and then for two or three years, and he was never hard upon me. I always recited the same five verses every Sunday. He was always satisfied with the performance. He never seemed to notice that these were the same five foolish virgins that he had been hearing about every Sunday for months. I always got my tickets and exchanged them for a book. They were pretty dreary books, for there was not a bad boy in the entire bookcase. They were all good boys and good girls and drearily uninteresting, but they were better society than none, and I was glad to have their company and disapprove of it. Twenty years ago Mr. Richmond had become possessed of Tom Sawyer’s cave in the hills three miles from town, town, town, town, and had made a tourist-resort tourist-resort tourist resort tourist-resort tourist-resort of it. But that cave is a thing of the past 1849 1849 not in (1849) typed in the margin (1849.) inset now. Twenty . . . it. But . . . now. Twenty . . . it. But . . . now. Twenty . . . it. But that cave is a thing of the past now. Paine bracketed and queried this passage; SLC struck out Paine’s marks and deleted the second sentence Twenty . . . it. In 1849 when the gold seekers gold seekers gold seekers gold-seekers were streaming through our little town of Hannibal, many of our grown men got the gold fever, and I think that all the boys had it. On the Saturday holidays in summertime summertime summer-time summer-time we used to borrow skiffs whose owners were not present and go down the river three miles to the cave hollow, (Missourian for “valley”), (Missourian for “valley”), not in (Missourian for “valley),” (Missourian for “valley”), and there we staked out claims and pretended to dig gold, panning out half a dollar a day at first; two or three times as much, later, and by and by whole fortunes, as our imaginations became inured to the work. Stupid and unprophetic lads! We were doing this in play and never suspecting. Why, suspecting. Why, suspecting. wWhy, ‘w’ underscored three times to capitalize suspecting. Why, that cave hollow and all the adjacent hills were made of gold! But gold! But gold!—but gold! But we did not know it. We took it for dirt. We left its rich secret in its own peaceful possession and grew up in poverty and went wandering about the world struggling for bread—and this because we had not the gift of prophecy. That region was all dirt and rocks to us, yet all it needed was to be ground up and scientifically handled and it was gold. That is to say, the whole region was a cement mine cement mine cement mine cement-mine —and they make the finest kind of Portland cement there now, five thousand barrels a day, with a plant that cost two million dollars. day, with a plant that cost two million dollars. day., with a plant that cost $2,000,000. day, with a plant that cost $2,000,000. Several months ago a telegram came to me from there saying that Tom Sawyer’s cave was now being ground into cement—would I like to say anything about it in public? But I had nothing to say. I was sorry we lost our cement mine but it was not worth while to talk about it at this late day, and, take take to take to take it all around, it was a painful subject anyway. There are seven miles of Tom Sawyer’s cave—that is to say the lofty ridge which conceals that cave stretches down the bank of the Mississippi seven miles to the town of Saverton. Several . . . Saverton. Several . . . Saverton. Several . . . Saverton. not in For a little while Reuel Gridley attended that school of ours. He was an elderly pupil; he was perhaps twenty-two or twenty-three years old. Then came the Mexican war war war wWar War and he volunteered. A company of infantry was raised in our town and Mr. Hickman, a tall, straight, handsome athlete of twenty-five, twenty-five, twenty-five twenty-five, twenty-five, was made captain captain Captain captain ‘C’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ captain of it and had a sword by his side and a broad yellow stripe down the leg of his gray gray grey uniform grey uniform gray pants. And when that company company Company company ‘C’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ company marched back and forth through the streets in its smart uniform—which it did several times a day for drill—its evolutions were attended by all the boys whenever the school hours permitted. I can see that marching company company Company company ‘C’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ company yet, and I can almost feel again the consuming desire that I had to join it. But they had no use for boys of twelve and thirteen, and before I had a chance in another war the desire to kill people to whom I had not been introduced had passed away. I saw the splendid Hickman in his old age. He seemed about the oldest man I had ever seen—an amazing and melancholy contrast with the showy young captain I had seen preparing his warriors for carnage so many, many years before. Hickman is dead—it is the old story. As Susy said, Susy said, Susiey said, Susy said, “What is it all for?” Reuel Gridley went away to the wars and we heard of him no more for fifteen or sixteen years. Then one day in Carson City while I was having a difficulty with an editor on the sidewalk—an editor better built for war than I was—I heard a voice say say say say, say, “Give him the best you’ve got, Sam, I’m at your back.” It was Reuel Gridley. He said he had not recognized me by my face but by my drawling style of speech. He went down to the Reese River mines about that time and presently he lost an election bet in his mining camp, and by the terms of it he was obliged to buy a fifty-pound sack of self-rising self-rising self-rising self-raising self-raising flour and carry it through the town, preceded by music, and deliver it to the winner of the bet. Of course the whole camp was present and full of fluid and enthusiasm. The winner of the bet put up the sack at auction for the benefit of the United States Sanitary Fund, and sold it. The purchaser put it up for the Fund and sold it. The excitement grew and grew. The sack was sold over and over again for the benefit of the Fund. The news of it came to Virginia City by telegraph. It produced great enthusiasm, and Reuel Gridley was begged by telegraph to bring the sack and have an auction in Virginia City. He brought it. An open barouche was provided, also a brass band. The sack was sold over and over again at Gold Hill, then was brought up to Virginia City toward night and sold—and sold again, and again, and still again, again, and again, and still again, again, again, and again, and still again, again, and again, and still again, netting twenty or thirty thousand thousand thousand thous-and hyphen reinscribed for clarity dollars for the Sanitary Fund. Gridley carried it across California and sold and sold selling selling and sold and sold it at various towns. He sold it for large sums in Sacramento and in San Francisco. He brought it East, sold it in New York and in various other cities, then then finally finally then then carried it out to a great Fair at St. Louis, and and not in and and went on selling it; and and not in and and finally made it up into small cakes and sold those at a a one a a dollar apiece. First and last, the sack of flour which had originally cost ten ten five five ten ten dollars, perhaps, netted more than two hundred thousand dollars for the Sanitary Fund. Reuel Gridley has been dead these many, many years—it is the old story. In that school were the first Jews I had ever seen. It took me a good while to get over the awe of it. To my fancy they were clothed invisibly in the damp and cobwebby mould mould mold of antiquity. They carried me back to Egypt, and in imagination I moved among the Pharaohs and all the shadowy celebrities of that remote age. The name of the boys was Levin. We had a collective name for them which was the only really large and handsome witticism that was ever born in that Congressional district. in that Congressional district. on those premises. on those premises. in that Congressional district. in that Congressional district. We called them “Twenty-two” “Twenty-two” Twenty-two “Twenty-two” “Twenty-two” —and even when the joke was old and had been worn threadbare we always followed it with the explanation, to make sure that it would be understood, “Twice Levin Levin Levin ‘eleven’ was typed above ‘Levin’; SLC canceled it Levin —twenty-two.” There were other boys whose names remain with me. Irving Ayres—but no matter, he is dead. Then there was George he is dead. no ¶ Then there was George he’s dead. ¶ George he’s is dead. no ¶ Then there was George he is dead. no ¶ Then there was George Butler, whom I remember as a child of seven wearing a blue leather belt with a brass buckle, buckle, buckle buckle, buckle, and hated and envied by all the boys on account of it. He was a nephew of General Ben Butler and fought gallantly at Ball’s Bluff and in several other actions of the Civil War Civil War civil war cCivil wWar Civil War . He is dead, long and long ago. Will Bowen Bowen Bowen Bowen (dead long ago), Ed Stevens (dead long ago), and John Briggs were special mates of mine. John is still living. 1845 1845 not in (1845) typed in the margin (1845.) inset In 1845, when I was ten years old, there was an epidemic of measles in the town and it made a most alarming slaughter among the little people. There was a funeral almost daily, and the mothers of the town were nearly nearly almost nearly nearly demented with fright. My mother was greatly troubled. She worried over Pamela and Henry and me, me, me, me, and took constant and extraordinary pains to keep us from coming into contact with the contagion. contagion. occasion. contagion. contagion. But upon reflection I believed that her judgment was at fault. It seemed to me that I could improve upon it if left to my own devices. I cannot remember now whether I was frightened about the measles or not, but I clearly remember that I grew very tired of the suspense I suffered on account of being continually under the threat of death. I remember that I got so weary of it and so anxious to have the matter settled one way or the other, and promptly, that this anxiety spoiled my days and my nights. I had no pleasure in them. I made up my mind to end this suspense suspense suspense and settle this matter one way or the other suspense and settle this matter one way or the other suspense and be done with it. Will Bowen Bowen Bowen Bowen was dangerously ill with the measles and I thought I would go down there and catch them. I entered the house by the front way and slipped along through rooms and halls, halls, halls, halls, keeping sharp watch against discovery, and at last I reached Will’s bed-chamber bed-chamber bed-room bed-roomchamber bed-chamber in the rear of the house on the second floor and got into it uncaptured. But that was as far as my victory reached. His mother caught me there a moment later and snatched me out of the house and gave me a most competent scolding and drove me away. She was so scared that she could hardly get her words out, and her face was white. I saw that I must manage better next time, and I did. I hung about the lane at the rear of the house and watched through cracks in the fence until I was convinced that the conditions were favorable; then favorable; then favorable. Then favorable; . Tthen period mended to a semicolon favorable; then I slipped through the back yard and up the back way and got into the room and into the bed with Will Bowen Bowen Bowen Bowen without being observed. I don’t know how long I was in the bed. I only remember that Will Bowen, Bowen, Bowen, Bowen, as society, society, society, society, had no value for me, for he was too sick to even notice that I was there. When I heard his mother coming I covered up my head, but that device was a failure. It was dead summertime summertime summertime summer-time —the cover was nothing more than a limp blanket or sheet, and anybody could see that there were two of us under it. It didn’t remain two very long. Mrs. Bowen Bowen Bowen Bowen snatched me out of the the that that the the bed and conducted me home herself, with a grip on my collar which she never loosened until she delivered me into my mother’s hands along with her opinion of that kind of a boy. It was a good case of measles that resulted. It brought me within a shade of death’s door. It brought me to where I no longer took took felt felt took took any interest in anything, but, on the contrary, felt a total absence of interest—which was most placid and tranquil and sweet and delightful and tranquil and sweet and delightful and tranquil and sweet and delightful and not in enchanting. I have never enjoyed anything in my life any more than I enjoyed dying that time. I was was was was ‘was’ underscored was , in effect, dying. The word had been passed and the family notified to assemble around the bed and see me off. I knew them all. There was no doubtfulness in my vision. They were all crying, but that did not affect me. I took but the vaguest interest in it, and that merely because I was the centre centre center center re centre of all this emotional attention and was gratified by it and vain of it. vain of it. felt complimented. felt complimented. vain of it. vain of it. When Dr. Cunningham had made up his mind that nothing more could be done for me he put bags of hot ashes all over me. He put them on my breast, on my wrists, on my ancles ancles ankles ; and so, very much to his astonishment—and doubtless to my regret—he dragged me back into this world and set me going again.