29 April 1908 Dictated April 29, 1908 Dictated April 29, 1908 Dic Apl. 29 Dictated April 29, 1908. Mr. Clemens meets Dr. Van Dyke near Cathedral and talks with him concerning the human race—Copy of extract from one of Dr. Van Dyke’s articles on fishing. Mr. Clemens . . . Van . . . Van . . . fishing. not in Mr. Clemens . . . van . . . van . . . fishing. Last night I read in the Atlantic Atlantic Atlantic Atlantic a passage from one of Rev. Dr. Van Dyke’s books, and I cut it out, with a vaguely defined notion that I might need it some time or other, by and by. I like Van Dyke, and I greatly admire his literary style—this notwithstanding the drawback that a good deal of his literary product is of a religious sort. He is about thirty-five thirty-five 35 years old, he is a Presbyterian, he is a clergyman, he is a member of the faculty of Princeton University. Still, I like him and admire him, notwithstanding. him, notwithstanding. him. him., notwithstanding. This forenoon I was lounging along Fifth Avenue Avenue avenue Avenue , and I stopped opposite the Roman Catholic cathedral to contemplate the crowd massed in front of the edifice. It is a grand Catholic day—a grand Catholic week, in fact. There’s a cardinal here with a message from the Pope, there are sixty bishops on hand, and there is to be great doings. A hand touched my shoulder—it was Van Dyke’s! We hadn’t met for a year. He nodded toward the multitude, and said: “What do you think of it? Doesn’t it warm your heart? They are ignorant and poor, but they have faith, they have belief, and it uplifts them, it makes them free. They have feelings, they have views, convictions, and they live under a flag where they have no master, and where they have the right and the privilege of doing their own thinking, and of acting according to their preference, unmolested. unmolested. unmolested.” unmolested What do you think of it?” “I think you have misinterpreted some of the details. You think that these people think. You know better. They don’t think; they get all their ostensible thinkings at second hand; they get their feelings at second hand; they get their faith, their beliefs, their convictions at second hand. They are in no sense free. They are like you and me and like like like every other like all the rest of the human race—slaves. Slaves of custom, slaves of circumstance, environment, association. This crowd is the human race in little. It is no trouble to love the human race, and we do love it, for it is a child, and one can’t help loving a child; but the minute we set out to admire admire admire admire ‘admire’ underscored the race we do as you have done—select and admire qualities qualities qualities quantlities which it doesn’t possess.” And so on and so on; we argued and argued, and arrived where we began: he clung to his reverence for the race as the grandest of the Creator’s inventions, and I clung to my conviction that it was not an invention to be really proud of. We had settled nothing. We were quiet for a while, and loafed peaceably peaceably peaceably peacefully along down the street. Then he took up the matter again. He reminded me that there were certain undeniably fine and beautiful qualities in our human nature. To wit To wit To-wit , that we are brave, and hate cowardly acts; that we are loyal and true, and hate treachery and deceit; that we are just and fair and honorable, and hate injustice and unfairness; that we pity the weak, and protect them from wrong and harm; that we magnanimously stand between the oppressor and the oppressed, and between the man of cruel disposition and his friendless victim. I asked him if he was acquainted with this person. He said he was—hundreds of him; that, broadly speaking, he had been describing a Christian; that a Christian, at his best, was just such a person as he had been portraying. I said— “I know a very good Christian who cannot fill this bill—nor any detail of it, in fact.” “I must take that as a jest,” he said, lightly. “No, not a jest.” “Then as as as a humorous as at least an extravagance, an exaggeration?” “No, as fact, simple fact. And I am not speaking of a a an average a a commonplace Christian, but of a high-class one; one whose Christian record is without spot; one who can take rank, unchallenged, with the very best. I have not known a better; and I love him and admire him.” “Come—you love and admire him, and yet he cannot fill any single detail of that beautiful character which I have portrayed?” “Not a single one. Let me describe one of his performances. He conceived the idea of getting some pleasure out of out of out of pursuing out of out of deceiving, beguiling, swindling, pursuing, frightening, capturing, torturing, mutilating and murdering murdering killing murdering murdering a child—” “Im-possible!” “A child that had never done him any harm; a child that was gratefully enjoying its innocent life and liberty, and not suspecting that any one would want to take them away from it—for any reason, least of all for the mere mere not in mere pleasure of it. And so—” “You are describing a Christian? There is no such Christian. You are describing a madman.” “No, a Christian—as good a one as lives. He sought out the child where it was playing, and offered it some dainties—offered them cunningly, persuasively, treacherously, cowardly, cowardly, cowardly, brutally cowardly, and the child, mistaking him for one who meant it it it not in a kindness, thankfully swallowed the dainties—then fled away in pain and terror, for the gift was poisoned. The man was full of joy at the success of his ingenious fraud, and chased the frightened frightened child frightened frightened child from one refuge to another for an hour, in a delirium of delight, and finally caught it and killed it; and by his eloquent enthusiasms one could see that he was as proud of his exploit as ever brave knight was, of deceiving, beguiling, betraying and destroying a cruel and wicked and pestilent giant thirty feet high. There—do you see? Is there any resemblance between this Christian Christian one Christian Christian and yours? This one was not brave, but the reverse of it; he was not fair and honorable, he was not fair and honorable, not in he was not fair and honorable, he was a deceiver, a beguiler, a swindler, he took advantage of ignorant trustfulness and betrayed it; he had no pity for distress distress distress, distress, and fright and pain, but took a frenzied delight in causing them, and watching the effects. causing them, and watching the effects. it. causing them, and watching the effects. causing them, and watching the effects. He was no protector of threatened liberty and menaced life, but took them both. And did it for fun. Merely for fun. But you seem to doubt me. Here is his own account of it; read it yourself; I clipped it out of the Atlantic last night. For For For “chi For ‘fish’ ‘fish’ “fish” in the text, read ‘child.’ ‘child.’ “child.” There is no other difference. It is a Christian in both cases, and in both cases the human race is exposed for what it is—a self-admiring humbug.” humbug.” humbug.” circled Add reprint marked “9.” humbug.” As a point of departure, listen to a quotation from Dr. Henry van Dyke:— “Chrr! sings the reel. The line tightens. The little rod firmly gripped in my hands bends into a bow of beauty, and a hundred feet behind us a splendid silver salmon leaps into the air. ‘What is it?’ cries the gypsy, ‘a fish?’ It is a fish, indeed, a noble ouananiche, and well hooked. Now if the gulls were here who grab little fish suddenly and never give them a chance; and if the mealy-mouthed sentimentalists were here, who like their fish slowly strangled to death in nets, they should see a fairer method of angling. “The weight of the fish is twenty times that of the rod against which he matches himself. The tiny hook is caught painlessly in the gristle of his jaws. The line is long and light. He has the whole lake to play in, and he uses almost all of it, running, leaping, sounding the deep water, turning suddenly to get a slack line. The gypsy, tremendously excited, manages the boat with perfect skill, rowing this way and that way, advancing or backing water to meet the tactics of the fish, and doing the most important part of the work. “After half an hour the ouananiche begins to grow tired and can be reeled in near to the boat. We can see him distinctly as he gleams in the dark water. It is time to think of landing him. Then we remember with a flash of despair that we have no landing-net! To lift him from the water by this line would break it in an instant. There is not a foot of the rocky shore smooth enough to beach him on. Our caps are far too small to use as a net for such a fish. What to do? We must row around with him gently and quietly for another ten minutes, until he is quite weary and tame. Now let me draw him softly toward the boat, slip my fingers under his gills to give a firm hold, and lift him quickly over the gunwale before he can gasp or kick. A tap on the head with the empty rod-case,—there he is,—the prettiest land-locked salmon that I ever saw, plump, round, perfectly shaped and colored, and just six and a half pounds in weight, the record fish of Jordan Pond.” Pond.” Pond.”1 Pond.” We had a very good time together for an hour. And didn’t agree about anything. But it was for this reason that we had a good time, disagreement being the salt of a talk. Van Dyke is a good instance of a certain fact: that outside of a man’s own specialty, his thinkings are poor and slipshod, and his conclusions not valuable. Van Dyke’s specialty is English Literature Literature literature ; he has studied it with deep and eager interest, and with an alert and splendid intelligence. With the result that the soundness of his judgments upon it is not to be lightly challenged by anybody. But he doesn’t know any more about the human being than the President does, or the Pope, or the philosophers, or the philosophers, or Schopenhauer, or the philosophers, or the philosophers, or the cat. I wanted to give him a copy of my privately printed, unsigned, unacknowledged and unpublished gospel, “What is Man? Man? Man? Man? ” for his enlightenment, but thought better of it. He wouldn’t understand it.