24 May 1906 Thursday, May 24, 1906 Mr. Clemens tries to buy his contracts from the American Publishing Company Company Co. and finally takes his next book, to James R. Osgood, who published it by subscription and made a failure of it—Osgood next published “The Prince and Pauper”—Mr. Clemens buys numerous patents, losing on all of them; also stock in Hartford Accident Insurance Company Hartford Accident Insurance Company Travelers Accident Insurance Co. Travelers Accident Insurence Co. —Description of Senator Jones—Mr. Clemens refuses to buy telephone stock. —meaning the rest of the directors. My opportunity was now come to right myself and level up matters with the Publishing Company, but I didn’t see it, of course. I was seldom able to see an opportunity until it had ceased to be one. I knew all about that house now, and I ought to have remained with it. I ought to have put a tax upon its profits for my personal benefit, the tax to continue until the difference between royalties and half profits should in time return from the Company’s pocket to mine, mine, mine, mine, and the Company’s robbery of me be thus wiped off the slate. But of course I couldn’t think of anything so sane as that, and I didn’t. I only thought of ways and means to remove my respectability from that tainted atmosphere. I wanted to get my books out of the Company’s hands and carry them elsewhere. After a time I went to Newton Case—in his house as before—and proposed that the Company cancel the contracts and restore my books to me free and unencumbered, the Company retaining as a consideration the money it had swindled me out of on “Roughing It,” “The Gilded Age,” “Sketches Old and New,” and “Tom Sawyer.” Mr. Case demurred at my language, but I told him I was not able to modify it; that I was perfectly satisfied that he and the rest of the Bible Class were aware of the fraud practised practised practiced on me in 1872 1872 1872 not in (1872) by Bliss—aware of it when it happened, happened, happened, happened, and consenting to it by silence. He objected to my calling the Board of Directors a Bible Class. And I said then it ought to stop opening its meetings with prayer—particularly when it was getting ready to swindle an author. I was expecting that Mr. Case would deny the charge of guilty knowledge and resent it, but he didn’t do it. That convinced me that my charge was well founded; therefore I repeated it, and proceeded to say unkind things about his theological seminary. I said, “You said, [¶] “You said, ¶ “You said, [¶] “You have put seventy-five thousand dollars into that factory and are getting a great deal of praise for it, whereas my share in that benefaction goes unmentioned—yet I have have have ‘have’ underscored have a share in it, for of every dollar that you put into it, a portion was stolen out of my pocket.” He [¶] He ¶ He [¶] He returned no thanks for these compliments. He was a dull man and unappreciative. Finally I tried to buy my contracts, but he said it would be impossible for the Board to entertain a proposition to sell, for the reason that nine-tenths of the Company’s livelihood was drawn from my books and therefore its business would be worth nothing if they were taken away. At a later time Judge What’s-his-name, a director, told me I was right; that the Board did know all about the swindle which Bliss had practised practised practiced upon me at the time that the fraud was committed. As I have remarked, I ought to have remained with the Company and leveled up the account. But I didn’t. I removed my purity from that mephitic atmosphere and carried my next book to James R. Osgood of Boston, formerly of the firm of Fields, Fields, J. R. Fields, Fields, Osgood and Company. That book was “Old Times on the Mississippi.” Osgood was to manufacture the book at my expense; publish it by subscription, and charge me a royalty for his services. Osgood was one of the dearest and sweetest and loveliest human beings to be found on the planet anywhere, but he knew nothing about subscription publishing, publishing, publishing, publishing, and he made a mighty botch of it. He was a sociable creature, and we played much billiards, and daily and nightly had a good time. And in the meantime his clerks ran our business for us and I think that neither of us inquired into their methods or knew what they were doing. That book was a long time getting built; and when at last the final draft was made upon my purse I realized that I had paid out fifty-six thousand dollars upon that structure. Bliss could have built a library for that money. It took a year to get the fifty-six thousand back into my pocket, and not very very not in very many dollars followed it. So this first effort of mine to transact that kind of business on my own hook was a failure. Osgood tried again. He published “The Prince and Pauper.” He made a beautiful book of it, but all the profit I got out of it was seventeen thousand dollars. Next, Osgood thought he could make a success with a book in the trade trade trade ‘trade’ underscored trade . He had been trained to trade-publishing trade-publishing trade-publishing trade-publishing . He was a little sore over his subscription attempts, attempts, attempts, attempts, and wanted to try. I gave him “The White Elephant,” which was a collection of rubbishy sketches, mainly. I offered to bet he couldn’t sell ten thousand copies in six months, and he took me up—stakes five dollars. He won the money, but it was something of a squeeze. However, However, However, However, I think I am wrong in putting that book last. I think that that was Osgood’s first effort, not his third. I should have continued with Osgood after his failure with “The Prince and the Pauper,” Pauper,” Pauper,” Pauper,” because I liked him so well, but he failed, and I had to go elsewhere. Meantime I had been having an adventure on the outside. An old and particular friend of mine unloaded a patent on me, price fifteen thousand dollars. thousand dollars. thousand. dollars. thousand dollars. It was worthless, and he had been losing money on it a year or two, but I did not know those particulars, because particulars, because particulars and , because particulars, because he neglected to mention them. He said that if I would buy the patent he would do the manufacturing and selling for me. So I took him up. Then began a cash outgo of five hundred dollars a month. That raven flew out of the ark ark Ark regularly every thirty days, but it never got back with anything, and the dove didn’t report for duty. After a time, and half a time, and another time, I relieved my friend and put the patent into the hands of Charles L. Webster, who had married a niece of mine and seemed a capable and energetic young fellow. At a salary of fifteen hundred a year he continued to send the raven out monthly, with the same old result to a penny. At last, when I had lost forty-two forty-two forty-two forty-two thousand dollars on that patent I gave it away to a man whom I had long detested and whose family I desired to ruin. ruin. ruin. ruin. injure. Then I looked around for other adventures. That same friend was ready with another patent. I spent ten thousand dollars on it in eight months. Then I tried to give that patent to the man whose family I was after. He was very grateful, but he was also experienced by this time, time, time, time, and was getting suspicious of benefactors. He wouldn’t take it, and I had to let it lapse. Meantime, another old friend arrived with a wonderful invention. It was an engine, or a furnace, or something of the kind, which would get out out out out 99 per cent cent cent. of all the steam that was in a pound of coal. I went to Mr. Richards of the Colt Arms Factory and told him about it. He was a specialist and knew all about coal and steam. He seemed to be doubtful about this machine, and I asked him why. He said because the amount of steam concealed in a pound of coal was known to a fraction, and that my inventor was mistaken about his 99 per cent. He showed me a printed book of solid pages of figures; figures that made me drunk and dizzy. He showed me that my man’s machine couldn’t come within 90 per cent cent cent. of doing what it proposed to do. I went away a little discouraged. But I thought that maybe the book was mistaken, and so I hired the inventor to build the machine on a salary of thirty-five dollars a week, I to pay all expenses. It took him a good many weeks to build it. it. the thing. the thing. it. He visited me every few days to report progress, and I early noticed by his breath and gait that he was spending thirty-six dollars a week on whisky whisky whiskey , and I couldn’t ever find out where he got the other dollar. Finally, when I had spent five thousand on this enterprise, the machine was finished, but it wouldn’t go. It did save 1 1 one per cent cent cent. of the steam that was in a pound of coal, but that was nothing. You could do it with a tea-kettle. I offered the machine to the man whose family I was pursuing, pursuing, after, after, pursuing, but without success. So I threw the thing away and looked around for something fresh. But I had become an enthusiast on steam, and I took some stock in a Hartford company company Company which proposed to make and sell and revolutionize everything with a new kind of steam pulley. The steam pulley pulled thirty-two thousand dollars out of my pocket in sixteen months, then went to pieces and I was alone in the world again, without an occupation. But I found one. I invented a scrap-book—and if I do say it myself, it was the only rational scrap-book the world has ever seen. I patented it and put it in the hands of that old particular friend of mine who had originally interested me in patents, and he made a good deal of money out of it. But by and by, just when I was about to begin to receive a share of the money myself, his firm failed. I didn’t know his firm was going to fail—he didn’t say anything about it. One day he asked me to lend the firm five thousand dollars and said he was willing to pay 7 per cent. As security he offered the firm’s note. I asked for an endorser. He was much surprised, and said that if endorsers were handy and easy to get at, at, at, at, he wouldn’t have to come to me for the the the not in money, he could get it anywhere. That seemed reasonable, and so I gave him the five thousand dollars. They failed inside of three days—and at the end of two or three years I got back two thousand dollars of the money. That five thousand dollars had a history. Early in 1872 Joe Joe Joe Joe Mr. Goodman wrote me from California that his friend friend friend and mine, friend and mine, Senator John P. Jones Jones Jones, was going to start a rival, in Hartford, to the Travelers Travelers Traveler’s Accident Insurance Company, and that Jones wanted Joe to take twelve thousand of the stock and had said he would see that he he Joe Joe he did not lose the money. Joe now proposed to transfer this opportunity to me, and said that if I would make the venture he was sure he was sure not in he was sure Jones would protect me from loss. So I took the stock and became a director. Jones’s brother-in-law, Lester, had been for a long time actuary in the Travelers Travelers Traveler’s Company. He was now transferred to our Company and we began business. There were five directors. Three of us attended every Board meeting for a year and a half. At the end of eighteen months the Company went to pieces and I was out of pocket twenty-three twenty-three thirty-two twenty-three twenty-three thousand dollars. Jones was in New York York York, York tarrying for for for not in a while at a hotel which he had bought, (the St. James), (the St. James), (the St. James,) (the St. James), and I sent Lester down there to see if he could see if he could not in see if he could get the twenty-three twenty-three thirty-two twenty-two twenty-two thousand dollars. But he came back and reported that Jones had been putting money into so many things that he was a good deal straitened and would be glad if I would wait a while. I did not suspect that Lester was drawing upon his fancy, but it was so. He hadn’t said anything to Jones about it. But his tale seemed reasonable, because I knew that Jones had built a line of artificial-ice factories clear across the Southern States Southern States southern states —nothing like it this side of the great Wall of China. I knew that the factories had cost him a million dollars or so, and that the people down there hadn’t been trained to admire ice and didn’t want any and wouldn’t buy any—that therefore the Chinese Wall was an entire loss and failure. I also knew that Jones’s St. James Hotel had ceased to be a profitable house because Jones, who was a big-hearted man with ninety-nine parts of him pure generosity—and that is the case to this day—had filled his hotel from roof to cellar with poor relations gathered from the four corners of the earth—plumbers, bricklayers bricklayers brick-layers brick-layers , unsuccessful clergymen, and, in fact, all the different kinds of people that knew nothing about the hotel business. I was also aware that there was no room in the hotel for the public, because all its rooms were occupied by a multitude of other poor relations gathered from the four corners of the earth, at Jones’s invitation, invitation, invitation, invitation, and waiting for Jones to find lucrative occupations for them. I was also aware that Jones had bought a piece of the State State state State of California with some spacious city sites on it; with room for railroads, and with a very fine and spacious and valuable harbor on its city front, and that Jones was in debt for these properties. Therefore I was content to wait a while. Among other things, I also knew this: that whereas Jones had promised to save Joe Goodman from loss, he was under no such promise to me. Among . . . me. not in Among . . . me. As the months drifted by, by, by, by, Lester now and then volunteered to go and see Jones on his own hook. His visits produced nothing. The fact is, is, is, is, Lester was afraid of Jones and felt a delicacy about troubling him with my matter while he had so many burdens on his shoulders. He preferred to pretend to me that he had seen Jones and had mentioned my matter to him, whereas in truth he had never mentioned it to him him Jones Jones him at all. At the end of two or three years Mr. Slee of our Elmira coal firm proposed to speak to Jones about it and I consented. Slee visited Jones and began in his tactful and diplomatic way to lead up to my matter, but before he had got well started Jones glanced up and said, “Do said, [¶] “Do said, no ¶ “Do said, [¶] “Do you mean to say that that money has never been paid to Clemens?” He [¶] He no ¶ He [¶] He drew his check for twenty-three thousand at once; said it ought to have been paid long ago, and that it would have been paid the moment it was due if he had known the circumstances. There are not many John P. Joneses in the world. There are not many John P. Joneses in the world. not in There are not many John P Jones’s in the world. This was in the spring of 1877. With that check in my pocket I was prepared to seek sudden fortune again. 1877 1877 (1877) The reader, deceived by what I have been saying about my adventures, will jump to the conclusion that I sought an opportunity at once. I did nothing of the kind. I was the burnt child. I wanted nothing further to do with speculations. General Hawley sent for me to come to the Courant office. I went there with my check in my pocket. There was a young fellow there who said that he had been a reporter on a Providence newspaper, but that he was in another business now: that he now: that he now. He now: that . Hhe was with with with with Graham Bell, and was and was the and was and was agent for a new invention called the telephone. He believed there was great fortune in store for it and wanted me to take some stock. I declined. I said I didn’t want anything more to do with wildcat wildcat wild cat speculation. Then he offered the stock to me at twenty-five. I said I didn’t want it at any price. He became eager—insisted that I at least take a trifle of it— at least take a trifle of it— take take at least take a trifle of it— five hundred dollars’ dollars’ dollars’ dollars’ worth. He said he would sell me as much as I wanted for five hundred dollars—offered to let me gather it up in my hands and measure it in a plug hat—said I could have a whole hatful hatful hatfull for five hundred dollars. But I was the burnt child, and I resisted all these temptations—resisted them easily—went off with my check intact, and next day lent five thousand of it, on an unendorsed note, to my friend who was going to go bankrupt three days later, as I have already stated. later, as I have already stated. later. later., as I have already stated. About the end of the year (or possibly in the beginning of 1878) 1878 1878 (1878) I put up a telephone wire from my house down to the Courant office, the only telephone wire in town, and the first first first ‘first’ underscored first one that was ever used in a private house in the world, for practical purposes. world, for practical purposes. world. world., for practical purposes. That young man couldn’t sell me any stock, but he sold a few hatfuls hatfuls hatfulls of it to an old dry-goods clerk in Hartford for five thousand dollars. That five thousand five thousand not in five thousand was that clerk’s whole fortune. He had been half a lifetime saving it. It is strange how foolish people can be, and what ruinous risks they can take when they want to get rich in a hurry. I was sorry for that man when I heard about it. I thought I might have saved him if I had had an opportunity to tell him about my experiences. We sailed for Europe on the 10th of April, April, April 1878. We were gone fourteen months, and when we got back one of the first things we saw was that clerk driving around in a sumptuous barouche with liveried servants all over it in piles— it in piles— it— it— in piles— and his telephone stock was emptying greenbacks into his premises at such a rate that he had to handle them with a shovel. It is strange the way the ignorant and and and and and inexperienced so often and so undeservedly succeed when the informed and the deserving deserving experienced experienced deserving fail. To return to my adventures in the publishing business business business buisness .