7 March 1906 Wednesday, March 7, 1906 Susy’s Susy’s Susie’s Susy’s Biography Biography biography —John Hay incident—Giving the young girl the French novel—Susy Susy Susie Susy and her father escort Mrs. Clemens to train, then go over Brooklyn Bridge—On the way to Vassar they discuss German profanity— Mr. Clemens tells of the sweet and profane German nurse—The arrival at Vassar and the dreary reception—Told by Susy Susy Susie Susy —The reading, etc.— Mr. Clemens’s opinion of girls—He is to talk to the Barnard girls this afternoon. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. To return to Susie’s biography— From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. not in The The “The “The The next day mamma planned to take the four o’clock car back to Hartford. We rose quite early that morning and went to the Vienna Bakery and took breakfast there. From there we went to a German bookstore and bought some German books for Clara’s birthday. birthday. birthday.” birthday.” birthday. Dear me, the power of association to snatch mouldy dead memories out of their graves and make them walk! That remark about buying foreign books throws a sudden white glare upon the distant past; and I see the long stretch of a New York street street street, street, street with an unearthly vividness, and John Hay walking down it, grave and remorseful. I was walking down it too, that morning, and I overtook Hay and asked him what the trouble was. He turned a lusterless eye upon me and said: “My case is beyond cure. In the most innocent way in the world I have committed a crime which will never be forgiven by the sufferers, for they will never believe—oh, well, no, I was going to say they would never believe that I did the thing innocently. The truth is they will know that I acted innocently, because they are rational people; but what of that? I never can look them in the face again—nor they me, perhaps.” Hay was a young bachelor, and at that time 1869 1869 not in 1869 inserted in the margin in brown pencil was on the Tribune Tribune Tribune “Tribune” staff. He explained his trouble in these words, substantially: “When I was passing along here yesterday morning on my way down town down town down town down-town to the office, I stepped into a bookstore where I am acquainted, and asked if they had anything new from the other side. They handed me a French novel, in the usual yellow paper cover, and I carried it away. I didn’t even look at the title of it. It was for recreation-reading recreation-reading recreation-reading recreation reading , and I was on my way to my work. I went mooning and dreaming along, and I think I hadn’t gone more than fifty yards when I heard my name called. I stopped, and a private carriage drew up at the sidewalk and I shook hands with the inmates—mother and young daughter, excellent people. They were on their way to the steamer to sail for Paris. The mother said, said, said said, revised in brown pencil said, “ ‘I “ ‘I ‘I ‘“I “ ‘I saw that book in your hand and I judged by the look of it that it was a French novel. Is it?’ it?’ it?” it?’ “I “I ‘“I revised in brown pencil “I said it was. “She said, ‘Do let me have it, so that my daughter can practise practise practice practise her French on it on the way over.’ “Of course I handed her the book, and we parted. Ten minutes ago I was passing that bookstore again, and some devil’s inspiration reminded me of yesterday and some . . . yesterday and some . . . yesterday not in and I stepped in and fetched away another copy of that book. Here it is. Read the first page of it. That is enough. You will know what the rest is like. I think it must be the foulest book in the French language—one of the foulest, anyway. I would be ashamed to offer it to a harlot—but, oh dear, I gave it to that sweet young girl without shame. Take my advice; don’t give away a book until you have examined it.” From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. ‘From Susy’s Biography.’ underscored From Susy’s Biography. Then Then “Then “Then Then mamma and I went to do some shopping and papa went to see General Grant. After we had finnished doing our shopping we went home to the hotel together. When we entered our rooms in the hotel we saw on the table a vase full of exquisett exquisett exquisett exquisitt red roses. Mamma who is very fond of flowers exclaimed “Oh “Oh ‘Oh ‘“Oh single quotation mark mended to double “Oh I wonder who could have sent them.” them.” them.’ them.’” single quotation mark mended to double them.” We both looked at the card in the midst of the roses and saw that it was written written written writtren on in papa’s handwriting, it was written in German. “Liebes “Liebes ‘Liebes Geshchenk on on on corrected to ‘an’, then revision canceled on die Mamma.” Mamma.” Mamma.’ ‘M’ typed over ‘m’ mamma.’ (I (I (I [I am sure I didn’t say “on”—that is Susy’s Susy’s Susiey’s Susy’s spelling, not mine; also I am sure I didn’t spell Geschenk so liberally as all that. S.L.C.) mine; also . . . that. S.L.C.) mine. S. L. C.) mine.; also . . . mine.—S.L.C.] mine; also . . . mine.—S. L. C.] Mamma was delighted. Papa came home and gave mamma her ticket; and after visiting a while with her went to see Major Pond and mamma and I sat down to our lunch. After lunch most of our time was taken up with packing, and at about three o’clock we went to escort mamma to the train. We got on board the train with her and stayed with her about five minutes and then we said good-bye to her and the train started for Hartford. It was the first time I had ever beene away from home without mamma in my life, although I was 13 yrs. old. Papa and I drove back to the hotel and got Major Pond and then went to see the Brooklyn Bridge we went across it to Brooklyn on the cars and then walked back across it from Brooklyn to New York. We enjoyed looking at the beautiful scenery and we could see the bridge moove under the intense heat of the sun. We had a perfectly delightful time, but weer pretty tired when we got back to the hotel. The next morning we rose early, took our breakfast and took an early train to Poughkeepsie. We had a very pleasant journey to Poughkeepsie. The Hudson was magnificent—shrouded with beautiful mist. When we arived at Poughkeepsie it was raining quite hard; which fact greatly dissapointed me because I very much wanted to see the outside of the buildings of Vasser Vasser Vasser Vassar College and as it rained that would be impossible. It was quite a long drive from the station to Vasser College and papa and I had a nice long time to discuss and laugh over German profanity. One of the German phrases papa particularly enjoys is “O “O ‘O ‘“O single quotation mark mended to double “O heilige maria Mutter Jesus!” Jesus!” Jesus!’ Jesus!’” single quotation mark mended to double Jesus!” Jean has a German nurse, and this was one of her phrases, there was a time when Jean exclaimed “Ach Gott!” “Ach Gott!” ‘Ach Gott!’ ‘“Ach Gott!’” single quotation marks mended to double “Ach Gott!” to every trifle, but when mamma found it out she was shocked and instantly put a stop to it. it. it.” it.” it. It brings that pretty little German girl girl creature creature girl revised in brown pencil girl vividly before me—a sweet and innocent and plump little creature creature creature, creature with peachy cheeks; a clear-souled little maiden and without offence offence offense offence , notwithstanding her profanities, and she was loaded to the eyebrows with them. She was a mere child. She was not fifteen yet. She was just from Germany, and knew no English. She was always scattering her profanities around, and they were such a satisfaction to me that I never dreamed of such a thing as modifying her. For my own sake, I had no disposition to tell on her. Indeed I took pains to keep her from being found out. I told her to confine her religious exercises exercises expressions expressions exercises exercises to the children’s quarters, and urged her to remember that Mrs. Clemens was prejudiced against pieties on week days week days week days week-days . To the children, the little maid’s profanities sounded natural and proper and right, right, right right, right, because they had been used to that kind of talk in Germany, and they attached no evil importance to it. It grieves me that I have forgotten those vigorous remarks. I long hoarded them in my memory as a treasure. But I remember one of them still, because I heard it so many times. The trial of that little creature’s life was the children’s hair. She would tug and strain with her comb, accompanying her work with her misplaced pieties. And when finally she was through with her triple job she always fired up and exploded her thanks toward the sky, where they belonged, in this form: “Gott sei Dank ich bin schon fertig mit’m Gott verdammtes Haar!” “Gott . . . Haar!” “Gott . . . Haar!” “Gott . . . Haar!” ‘ “Gott . . . Haar!” ’ underscored “Gott . . . Haar!” (I believe I am not quite brave enough to translate it.) it.) it). it.) From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. ‘From Susy’s Biography.’ underscored From Susy’s Biography. We We “We “We We at length reached Vassar College and she looked very finely, her buildings and her grounds being very beautiful. We went to the front doore and rang rang rang range the bell bell bell beell bell . The young girl who came to the doore wished to know who we wanted to see. Evidently we were not expected. Papa told her who we wanted wanted wanted wished to see and she showed us to the parlor. We waited, no one came; and waited, no one came, still no one came. It was beginning to seem pretty awkward, “Oh “Oh ‘Oh ‘“Oh single quotation mark mended to double “Oh well this is a pretty piece of business,” business,” business,’ business,’” single quotation mark mended to double business,” papa exclaimed. At length we heard footsteps coming down the long corridor and Miss C, (the lady who had invited papa) came into the room. She greeted papa very pleasantly and they had a nice little chatt together. Soon the lady principal also entered and she was very pleasant and agreable. She showed us to our rooms and said she would send for us when dinner was ready. We went into our rooms, but we had nothing to do for half an hour exept to watch the rain drops as they fell upon the window panes. At last we were called to dinner, and I went down without papa as he never eats anything in the middle of the day. I sat at the table with the lady principal and enjoyed very much seing seing seing seeing all the young girls trooping into the dining-room. After dinner I went around the College with the young ladies and papa stayed in his room and smoked. When it was supper time papa went down and ate supper with us and we had a very delightful supper. After supper the young ladies went to their rooms to dress for the evening. Papa went to his room and I went with the lady principal. At length the guests began to arive, but papa still remained in his room until called for. Papa read in the chapell. It was the first time I had ever heard him read in my life—that is in public. When he came out on to the stage I remember the people behind me exclaimed “Oh “Oh ‘Oh ‘“Oh single quotation mark mended to double “Oh how queer he is! Isn’t he funny!” funny!” funny!’ funny!’” single quotation mark mended to double funny!” I thought papa was very funny, although I did not think him queer. He read “A Trying Situation” “A Trying Situation” “A Trying Situation” ‘“A Trying Situation ’” single quotation marks mended to double “A Trying Situation” and “The Golden Arm,” “The Golden Arm,” “The Golden Arm,” ‘“The Golden Arm,’” single quotation marks mended to double “The Golden Arm,” a ghost story that he heard down South when he was a little boy. “The Golden Arm” “The Golden Arm” “The Golden Arm” ‘“The Golden Arm’” single quotation marks mended to double “The Golden Arm” papa had told me before, but he had startled me so that I did not much wish to hear it again. But I had resolved this time to be prepared and not to let myself be startled, but still papa did, and very very much; he startled the whole roomful of people and they jumped as one man. The other story was also very funny and interesting and I enjoyed the evening inexpressibly much. After papa had finished reading we all went down to the collation in the dining-room and after that there was dancing and singing. Then the guests went away and papa and I went to bed. The next morning we rose early, took an early train for Hartford and reached Hartford at ½ past 2 o’clock. We were very glad to get back. back. back.” back.” back. How charitably she treats that ghastly experience! It is a dear and lovely disposition, and a most valuable one, that can brush away indignities and discourtesies and seek and find the pleasanter features of an experience. Susy Susy Susiey Susy had that disposition, and it was one of the jewels of her character that had come to her straight from her mother. It is a feature that was left out of me at birth. And, at seventy, I have not yet acquired it. I did not go to Vassar College professionally, but as a guest—as a guest, guest, guest, guest, and gratis. Aunt Clara (now Mrs. John B. (now Mrs. John B. (Mrs. ((now Mrs. John B. revised in brown pencil (now Mrs. John B. Stanchfield) was a graduate of Vassar and it was to please her that I inflicted that journey upon Susy Susy Susiey Susy and myself. The invitation had come to me from both the lady mentioned by Susy Susy Susiey Susy and the President of the College—a sour old saint who has probably been gathered to his fathers long ago; and I hope they enjoy him; I hope they value value enjoy enjoy value value his society. I think I can get along without it, in either end of the next world. We arrived at the College in that soaking rain, and Susy Susy Susiey Susy has described, with just a suggestion of dissatisfaction, the sort of reception we got. Susy Susy Susiey Susy had to sit in her damp clothes half an hour while we waited in the parlor; then she was taken to a fireless room and left to wait there again, as she has stated. I do not remember that President’s name, and I am sorry. He did not put in an appearance until it was time for me to step upon the platform in front of that great garden of young and lovely blossoms. He caught up with me and advanced upon the platform with me and was going to introduce me. I said in substance: “You ¶ “You no ¶ “You ¶ “You have allowed me to get along without your help thus far, far, far, far, and if you will retire from the platform I will try to do the rest without it.” I ¶ I no ¶ I ¶ I did not see him any more, but I detest his memory. Of no ¶ Of ¶ Of no ¶ Of course my resentment did not extend to the students, and so I had an unforgetable unforgetable unforgetable unforgettable good time talking to them. And I think they had a good time too, for they responded “as one man,” “as one man,” as one man, “as one man,” “as one man,” to use Susy’s Susy’s Susiey’s Susy’s unimprovable phrase. Girls are charming creatures. I shall have to be twice seventy years old before I change my mind as to that. I am to talk to a crowd of them this afternoon, students of Barnard College, (the sex’s (the sex’s (the sexes (the sex’s annex to Columbia University,) University,) University,) University,) University), and I think I shall have just as just as just as as pleasant a time with those lassies lassies lassies lasses as I had with the Vassar girls twenty-one years ago.