23 November 1906 Friday, November 23, 1906 Mr. Clemens tells of his idea in regard to international copyright, which he disclosed to Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes thirty-five years ago. I was supposing that I had said, yesterday, all that I wanted to say about copyright, but I was probably mistaken. This morning’s mail brings a printed circular from Thorvald Thorvald Thorwald Solberg, Register of Copyrights, Washington, conveying notice of the fact that the Senate and House Committees on Patents will resume hearings upon the pending Copyright Bill on December 7th and 8th, and that the two Committees will sit conjointly in the Senate Reading Room at the Library of Congress. Mr. Solberg requests that those persons desiring to be heard will as soon as possible notify his office, stating the amount of time they will require and the particular provisions of the bill upon which they will desire to speak. This softly, sweetly, gently, wafts me back, as upon perfumed zephyrs, to the dim and dreamy and devilish past. Reminiscences connected with copyright-anguishes copyright-anguishes copyright-anguishes crop up all around me, and I am surprised to find that I have foolishly wasted in this drunken and nefarious traffic so many hours that might have been usefully employed. Thirty-five years ago, an idea, in the line of international copyright, was born to me in Hartford, and I took the first train and carried it, proud and rejoicing, to Boston, and exposed it to Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes for his homage and admiration. This idea was very simple in construction—even a Congressman Congressman congressman could have understood have understood understand have understood it. It was based upon principle, and it ignored policy, as being unworthy to travel in its high company. It proposed that our copyright law should be so amended as to extend each and every one of its protections and benevolences to all foreign authors upon the same terms as those as those as those enjoyed by the American author; that this apparent grace should be extended not as a grace but as the foreign author’s right right right ‘right’ underscored , thus putting the foreign author’s clothes and his book upon the same basis—as being his property, and not righteously and fairly filchable from him by any government government Government , Christian or pagan. And finally, this recognition of the foreign author’s right to his property was to be a gratis gratis gratis ‘gratis’ underscored act; nothing was to be required of any foreign government in return; the act was to be a simple act of justice, and unsullied and undegraded undegraded undecorated undegraded by any trading and trafficking trafficking trafficing in, and selling of, said justice. Dr. Holmes laughed at this project most cruelly and cordially. He said it was Utopian; that governments didn’t deal in gratis contributions of pecuniarily valuable graces; that governments did not trade in dreams and romance; that they did not give something for nothing; that it had been their settled policy, from the beginnings of civilization civilization civilzation —and and or and earlier, for that matter—to always require something for something in a trade with a foreign government, and also always to try to get two somethings for one something, and accomplish it if humanly possible. He said that if our Government should do this juvenile thing, all the other Christian governments would laugh at it, and would gladly accept our sentimental charity and chuckle over it, and never dream of furnishing anything in return. I was sorry to learn that apparently it is only Christian peoples peoples peoples ‘peoples’ underscored that stand for Christian morals and teach them from the pulpit, and in the schools, and that Christian governments governments governments ‘governments’ underscored , placed in power by these same moral people, have no public morals, but deride them, and do it frankly, openly, aboveboard aboveboard aboveboard ‘above board’ marked to close up , and even boastfully. I was only half as old, then, as I am now, and I did not know, then, as I know now, that our American governments, municipal, state, and federal, are very poor in public public public ‘public’ underscored morals, while the men that constitute these governments are in most cases properly equipped with private morals and live up to them in private life. I contended that my plan was a good one, even as a measure of policy; that while it might be very true that the English Government Government government ‘government’ underscored might laugh in its sleeve at our romantic exhibition of justice and cleanliness, the English people’s people’s people’s ‘people’s’ underscored attitude would be very different; that they would be ashamed to receive a common justice at our hands without a return, hands without a return, hands, without a return, and would demand that for shame’s sake, and for decency’s sake, we be met half way, and British honor and fairness be saved from reproach. I used that argument, but, at the same time, I really cared not a farthing about a foreign return of our fair-dealing fair-dealing fair-dealing . In my capacity as just a human being, I was not able to conceive of myself entering into an agreement with another human being to leave his property unstolen provided he would respect mine in the same way; and governments being nothing more than assemblages of human beings representative of the people, and ostensibly selected for character and intelligence, I was not able to understand how how why how they could propagate propagate propogate thieving, encourage it, applaud it, and stubbornly refuse to respect property rights, and still keep their own self-respect self-respect self respect . I ventured another argument. I said we had been living on stolen English literature ever since the discovery of America by Columbus; that we were still living upon it and in that way teaching our people to envy and worship kings, emperors, dukes, high birth, hereditary privilege, and many other offensively undemocratic things; that we were still stealing this unwholesome literature, and thereby rooting and establishing monarchical and aristocratic ideals in the hearts of our nation; and yet, most incongruously, parents, schools, colleges, universities, and Fourth of July stump orators were all engaged in deriding and abusing these very ideals and trying to train the nation in a wholesome disrespect for for of for them. I said that just at the present time England ought to be very glad, and indeed eager, to accept my proposition, because we were stealing fifty fifty twenty fifty books from her where she stole one from us; but that a time could come, and probably would come, when this condition of things would be reversed; when her population would no longer be only a third short of our own, but would have well nigh well nigh well-night disappeared under our swarming accumulations of the human animal, and we should be furnishing fifty fifty twenty fifty books to her her her ‘her’ underscored one, and anxiously and prayerfully anxiously and prayerfully and anxiously and prayerfully wishing an international copyright law could be arranged on a moral basis, leaving policy out. However, I did not convince Dr. Holmes. He made game of all my notions, and I went back home very much wilted, and dropped the international copyright scheme out of my mind. I had not mentioned it to any one except Dr. Holmes, and I was glad of that, and made up my mind that I would not furnish anybody else an opportunity to laugh at me. But as it turned out, I had not been so very unstatesmanlike after all. Fourteen years later the Hawley International Copyright Bill, which I have already spoken of, came before Congress, and it was just my scheme over again. But it stood no chance; we were a Christian nation with private and effective Christian morals; our Government Government government was a Christian government with Christian public morals, and a moral Hawley Bill stood no more chance there than it would have stood in that place whither so many Congresses have gone, gone, gone, and will go.