11 August 1906 Saturday, August 11, 1906 Man incapable of originating a thought; simply receives suggestions from the outside—Note to Andrew Carnegie, asking for hymn-book—The pension for John T. Lewis—Mr. Rogers’s doubt as to the existence of John T. Lewis—Two letters from Lewis—Kipling comes to America—Visits Mr. Clemens in Elmira. From the beginning of time, philosophers of all breeds and shades have been beguiled by the persuasions of man’s bulkiest attribute, vanity, into believing that a human being can originate a thought in his own head. I suppose I am the only person who knows he can’t. In my own person I have studied him most carefully these many years—indeed for a quarter of a century—and I now know beyond doubt or question that his mind is quite incapable of inventing a thought, and is strictly limited to receiving suggestions from the outside and manufacturing second-hand thoughts out of them. The expert in hypnotism takes pride in the notion that in powerfully moving his subject by suggestion, he has discovered a new thing, whereas no human being has ever been moved to any act or idea by any force except suggestion. The reason that I can come to this dictation-industry dictation-industry dictation-industry dictation industry every morning unprepared with a text, is that I know quite well that somebody’s passing remark, or a paragraph in the newspaper, or a letter in the mail, will suggest something which will remind me of something in my life’s experiences and will surely furnish me, by this process, one or more one or more a hatful of one or more a hatful of texts. The first thing I notice in this morning’s paper is a note which I wrote to Andrew Carnegie some years ago, and which, for a certain reason, flashes John T. Lewis into my mind, although Lewis is not mentioned in the note. My [¶] My “MARK TWAIN ASKS FOR HYMN BOOK. [¶] ‘“My “MARK TWAIN ASKS FOR HYMN BOOK. [¶] ‘My dear Mr. Carnegie,—I see by the papers that you are very prosperous. I want to get a hymn-book. It costs six shillings. I will bless you, God God God Heaven God will bless you, and it will do a great deal of good. Yours truly, Mark Mark Mark Twain. Mark Twain. P.S.—Don’t send me the hymn-book; send me the six shillings. shillings. shillings.” shillings.” The note suggests that fine old colored friend, John T. Lewis, because of the suspicious form of it. Many a stranger would think that the hymn-book was only a blind; that at bottom I didn’t really want the hymn-book, but only wanted to get my hands on the money. Such a suspicion would do me wrong. I only wanted the hymn-book. I was most anxious to get it, but I wanted to select it myself. If I had succeeded in getting the money I would have bought a hymn-book with it and not any other thing. Although I have no evidence but my own as to this, I believe it to be trustworthy and sufficient. I am speaking from my grave, and it is not likely that I would break through the sod with an untruth in my mouth. It is a strange thing, thing, thing, thing when you come to examine it—Andrew Carnegie has built a Peace Palace on the other side, side, side, side for the housing of that great and beneficent modern institution, the Hague Tribunal, at a cost of ten million dollars; he has built, and endowed with ten millions, that other most noble and inestimably valuable benefaction, the Carnegie Institute; he has established a permanent fund of fifteen million dollars for the dignified and respectable maintenance of veterans of both sexes who have devoted their long lives to the higher grades of teaching, and in their old age find themselves poor, forlorn, and without support—a benefaction of so fine and gracious a sort that it brings the moisture to one’s eyes to think of it; he has distributed eighty million dollars’ worth of free libraries around about the planet for the intellectual elevation of men of all grades and creeds and creeds and creeds not in and colors—and yet when he could save a tottering soul from destruction with six shillings’ worth of hymn-book, he turns coldly away and leaves that soul to perish. Truly there are a good many different kinds of people in the world, and Andrew Carnegie is one of them. If not several. The unworded doubt which his silence cast upon the purity of my intentions was duplicated, in another way, by another man, Henry Rogers. In a previous chapter I have told how John T. Lewis saved the lives of a rich rich rich deleted and then marked ‘stet’ rich man’s wife and daughter, thirty years ago, when not another man in the State could have done it, and was rewarded with thanks—repeated thanks, lots of thanks, plenty of thanks. About five years ago the rheumatism took hold of him and he was not able to get a livelihood out of his farm. It took all the money he could make to pay the interest on the money he borrowed in that ancient day—a loan which I mentioned when I was speaking of it before. Something had to be done for his relief, therefore therefore so therefore so Susy Crane and Jean and I contributed a monthly sum, in the form of a pension, so that he might live the rest of his days without work. John T. Lewis . . . without work. John T. Lewis . . . without work. my ancient friend the colored ex-slave, John T. Lewis, needed the help of a pension. deleted passage circled to indicate a temporary suppression; ‘leave this out’ written twice in the margin John T. Lewis . . . without work. note that within the entries through 173.8, the readings of TS1 ribbon are not represented as canceled I offered Henry Rogers Henry Rogers Henry Rogers H.H.R. circled to indicate a temporary suppression Henry Rogers a chance to enlarge enlarge enlarge furnish proposed alternate reading interlined enlarge that pension, and he was quite willing, and said he would send his check to John T. Lewis on the first of every month. I said said said— said no, I was not very busy, make the check to my order. He said “Not on your life”—or words to that effect. He did not stop with that injurious remark, but suggested that it was more than likely that there wasn’t any such colored man as John T. Lewis. I offered to bring witnesses, but he said he believed he could do better by getting some one else to select the witnesses. I think he is the stubbornest man, about some things, I have ever known—the stubbornest and the most suspicious. He was determined to draw the checks to John T. Lewis’s order, and it was only by tiring him out that at last I got him to draw them to mine. But he always disbelieved in John T. Lewis. I got myself spaciously photographed alongside of John T. Lewis, standing in front of the farm-house, at Susy Crane’s farm. It did not convince him; he merely looked sad, and framed it and hung it up in his private office at 26 Broadway, at 26 Broadway, at 26 Broadway, circled to indicate a temporary suppression; deletion mark written in the margin at 26 Broadway, and labeled it “The Imaginary John T. Lewis”—and there it hangs yet; hangs there looking so honest that it would convince any but an implacably prejudiced mind. I pledge my honor I always sent the money to Lewis. Moreover, I sent it through Susy Crane, who delivered it to him, month by month, in person; and to this she will testify, knowing me well enough to know that if she declines I will make trouble. Moreover . . . trouble. Moreover . . . trouble. circled to indicate a temporary suppression; ‘leave out.’ written in the margin Moreover . . . trouble. The pension set Lewis up quite to his content; made a tranquilly care-free and happy man of him, and thenceforth he claimed that he was the only absolutely independent man in the county. As you perceive, it is the Carnegie spirit over again—with this difference: John T. Lewis did get Henry Rogers’s Henry Rogers’s Henry Rogers’s H.H.R.’s circled to indicate a temporary suppression; deletion mark written in the margin Henry Rogers’s money, but I never got the hymn-book. While I was taking a long and comfortable and unearned holiday at Fairhaven, at Fairhaven, at Fairhaven, circled to indicate a temporary suppression; deletion mark written in the margin at Fairhaven a few weeks ago, the following letter arrived at Dublin at Dublin at Dublin circled to indicate a temporary suppression; deletion mark written in the margin at Dublin from Quarry Farm. It brought the news of Lewis’s death, and added certain particulars. It brought . . . particulars. It brought . . . particulars. not in I call attention, with a just pride, to the title which it confers upon me. All who know me—except perhaps Henry Rogers and Andrew Carnegie—will grant that I deserve it. It is a matter of pride to me to reflect that I acquired it without the help of a hymn-book. I call . . . hymn-book. I call . . . hymn-book. circled to indicate a temporary suppression; ‘leave out.’ written in the margin I call . . . hymn-book. I do not know that I am surprised to find by the letter by the letter by the letter not in that Lewis was a Dunker Baptist. He was born one, in Maryland, but when I first knew him, something more than a generation ago, he had sampled every religion in the market, in turn, had found none of them equal to the task of saving a soul like his, and had at last joined the Free-Thinkers and found rest for his spirit. I think it quite likely that in the long lapse of years between that time and this he went back over his course, taking a bite out of each old friendly religion as he went, and finally fetched up in Dunkerdom, whence in his childhood he had started out on his long and adventurous salvation-excursion salvation-excursion religious salvation-excursion religious excursion . Quarry Farm. Elmira, N.Y. July 23, 1906. Dear and Holy Samuel, Several weeks ago I received a call from Lewis which should have fallen to your lot instead of mine; mine; mine,; comma mended to a semicolon mine; for, for, for, for all the half hour, as I stood under the vines on the front porch visiting with Lewis, you were in my mind. He was half reclining in a low open wagon, into which he could climb, and out of which he could easily roll. Lewis began by saying, “You “You ‘“You single quotation mark mended to double ‘You have been very kind to me, and I thought it was not quite fair for me to slip away without telling you I was failing. And I wanted to talk with you about getting one of my own people to preach the funeral sermon. The nearest Dunker Baptist minister is in Brooklyn, a white man, and I want if possible to get him to come up here for a few days to learn about my character, so that he can speak intelligently intelligently intelligently, intelligently, at the funeral. Would you be willing to give a little something toward it, and maybe some other friends would.” would.” would.”’ single quotation mark mended to double would.’ While a worldly ambition of this nature nature nature, nature, did not strongly appeal to me, it was the request of a dying friend and I said yes, I would help bear the expense. Lewis then said it would be a great comfort to talk with one of his own faith, which was easy to understand. He then said, “Would “Would ‘“Would single quotation mark mended to double ‘Would you be willing to give him a meal if he comes?” comes?” comes?”’ single quotation mark mended to double comes?’ “Certainly,” “Certainly,” ‘“Certainly,”’ single quotation marks mended to double ‘Certainly,’ I promised, and after a little talk about when I should pay the rent of his farm, he went on to get his mail, his precious checks, and see his Doctor. The Doctor forbade forbade forbade forbad his going to town, but after a few days of rest rest rest, rest, Lewis was again on the road, impressing all who saw him with his feebleness. Perhaps ten days ago he gave up the trips when I made all the calls, as he went steadily down. He was always cheerful, and seemed not to suffer much pain, told stories, and was able to eat almost everything. Three days ago a new difficulty appeared, on account of which which which, which, his Doctor said he must go to the Hospital for care, such as it was quite impossible to give in his home. He died on the way there. With love, Susan L. Crane. Crane. Crane.” Crane.” After a few days the following interesting letter arrived: Friday Friday “Friday “Friday , July 27. Dear Holy Samuel, Now that two days are passed, it seems hardly worth while to tell you of the funeral of Lewis, save that I promised. At the hour named a goodly company of colored and white friends gathered at the parlors of the undertaker, where all the arrangements were made in good order. There was a long silent wait, after which Mr. Harrington, the undertaker, said that Mr. Hough, of Brooklyn who was expected, failed to come—and Mrs. Harrington would read a paper prepared by Mr. Lewis which would explain why they did not secure the services of some one else. Quarry Farm . . . some one else. “Quarry Farm . . . some one else. He wrote his own funeral sermon, and it was read over his coffin. In it—I quote from the letter— deleted passage circled and marked to indicate a temporary suppression; ‘leave this out. SKIP to 1047’ and ‘leave out’ written in the margin Quarry Farm . . . some one else. note that within the entries through 174.45, the readings of TS1 ribbon are not represented as canceled There were facts facts facts (in the mentioned paper) facts concerning Lewis’s birth, his life in various places, his joining the Dunker church, followed by the statement that unless some brother of his own denomination could preach his funeral sermon he wished his body to be buried without ceremony, as he did not recognize as Christians any who did not follow the explicit teaching of the Lord. This was a surprise, there was a chill, a silence, and for an instant I felt excluded from all possibility of future rescue. rescue. good. rescue. ‘Insert’ written in the margin good. A Psalm and the Lord’s Prayer closed the simple, suitable service. Think of it! A will strong enough to exclude all but the Dunkers! Dunkers! Dunkers,! Dunkers, still, Lewis prayed for you and Mr. Rogers, Rogers, Rogers, H.H.R., circled to indicate a temporary suppression; deletion mark written in the margin Rogers, and you may be Dunkers yet. He was deeply and sincerely grateful to you, and had this not been as true as it was, yours was a good, a beautiful thought, faithfully put into action, year after year when you were unable to see the comfort, the blessing you were conferring. conferring. conferring.* footnote: * It was I that got him the pension, and it was a noble act. M.T. conferring. This has been my privilege, and I am thankful the struggles are ended for the lonely man. The old hill folks are nearly all gone. Most lovingly yours, Susan L. Crane. The old . . . Susan L. Crane. The old . . . Susan L. Crane.” The old . . . Susan L. Crane.” I am glad he prayed for Henry Rogers; Henry Rogers; Henry Rogers; H.H. circled to indicate a temporary suppression Rogers; and it would have been well enough if he had given Carnegie a lift, lift, lift, lift too. Lewis’s last estate reminds me of David Gray’s, and is an impressive revelation of the strength and persistency persistency permanencysistency permanency of impressions made upon the human mind in the early years, when its feelings and emotions are fresh, young, and strong, and before it is capable of reasoning. At five years of age David Gray was a strenuous Presbyterian; at thirty-five he had long been a pronounced agnostic—not to put it stronger. He died as strenuous a Presbyterian as he had been when he was five years old and an expert theologian. This morning’s cables contain a verse or two from Kipling, voicing his protest against a liberalizing new policy of the British Government which he fears will deliver the balance of power in South Africa into the hands of the conquered Boers. Kipling’s name, and Kipling’s words always stir me now—stir me more than do any other living man’s. But I remember a time, seventeen or eighteen years back, when the name did not suggest anything to me, and only the words moved me. At that time Kipling’s name was beginning to be known here and there, in spots, in India, but had not traveled outside of that empire. He came over and traveled about America, maintaining himself by correspondence with Indian journals. He wrote dashing, free-handed, brilliant letters, but no one outside of India knew about it. On his way through the State of New York, he stopped off at Elmira and made a tedious and blistering journey up to Quarry Farm in quest of me. He ought to have telephoned the farm first; then he would have learned that I was at the Langdon homestead, hardly a quarter of a mile from his hotel. But he was only a lad of twenty-four, and properly impulsive—and he set out, without inquiring, on that dusty and roasting journey up the hill. He found Susy Crane and my little Susy there, and they came as near making him comfortable as the weather and the circumstances would permit——