29 March 1906 Thursday, March 29, 1906 Mr. Clemens as apprentice apprentice apprecntice apprentice to Mr. Ament—Wilhelm II’s dinner, and potato incident—The printing of Reverend Reverend Rev. Alexander Campbell’s sermon—Incident of dropping watermelon watermelon water-melon water-melon on Henry’s head—Orion buys Hannibal Journal Journal Journal which is a failure—Then he goes to Muscatine, Iowa, and marries—Mr. Clemens starts out alone to see the world—Visits St. Louis, New York, Philadelphia, Washington—Then goes to Muscatine and works in Orion’s office—Finds fifty-dollar fifty-dollar 50-dollar bill—Thinks of going to explore the Amazon and collect coca coca cocoa coca —Gets Horace Bixby to train him as pilot—Starts with Orion for Nevada when Orion is made Secretary to Territory of Nevada. But I am in error. But . . . error. But . . . error. But . . . error. circled in pencil by Paine; circle then erased and sentence deleted by SLC not in Orion no ¶ Orion no ¶ Orion ¶ Orion did not come to Hannibal until two or three years after my father’s death. He remained in St. Louis. Meantime he Meantime he He Meantime He Meantime he was a journeyman printer and earning wages. Out of his wage he supported my mother and my brother Henry, who was two years younger than I. My sister Pamela helped in this support by taking piano pupils. Thus we got along, but it was pretty hard sledding. I was not one of the burdens, because I was taken from school at once, once, once once, upon my father’s death, death, death death, and placed in the office of the Hannibal Courier, Courier, Courier, “Courier,” as printer’s apprentice, and Mr. Ament, Ament, Ament, Ament, S., S., the editor and proprietor of the paper, paper, paper paper, paper, allowed me the usual emolument of the office of apprentice—that is to say board and clothes, but no money. The clothes consisted of two suits a year, but one of the suits always failed to materialize and the other suit was not purchased so long as Mr. Ament’s Ament’s Ament’s Ament’s S.’s S.’s old clothes held out. I was only about half as big as Ament, Ament, Ament, Ament, Mr. S., Mr. S., consequently his shirts gave me the uncomfortable sense of living in a circus-tent circus-tent circus-tent circus tent , and I had to turn up his pants to my ears to make them short enough. There were two other apprentices. One was Wales McCormick, Wales McCormick, Wales McCormick, Wales McCormick, Steve Wilkins, Steve Wilkins, seventeen or eighteen years old old old, old, old and a giant. When he was in Ament’s Ament’s Ament’s Ament’s Mr. S.’s Mr. S.’s clothes they fitted him as the candle-mould candle-mould candle-mold candle-mould fits the candle—thus he was generally in a suffocated condition, particularly in the summertime summertime summertime summer-time . He was a reckless, hilarious, admirable creature; he had no principles, and was delightful company. At first we three apprentices had to feed in the kitchen with the old slave cook and her very handsome and bright and well-behaved young mulatto daughter. For his own amusement—for he was not generally laboring for other people’s amusement—Wales Wales Wales Wales Steve Steve was constantly and persistently and loudly and elaborately making love to that mulatto girl and distressing the life out of her and worrying the old mother to death. She would say say say say, say, “Now Now Now Now, Marse Wales, Marse Wales, Wales, Marse Wales, Wales, Marse Wales, Wales, Steve,Marse Wales, Steve, Steve, Marse Steve, can’t you behave yourself?” With encouragement like that, Wales Wales Wales Wales Steve Steve would naturally renew his attentions and emphasize them. It was killingly funny to Ralph and me. And, to speak truly, the old mother’s distress about it was merely a pretense pretense pretense pretence . She quite well understood that by the customs of slave-holding slave-holding slave-holding slave-holding slaveholding communities it was Wales’s Wales’s Wales’s Wales’s Steve’s Steve’s right to make love to that girl if he wanted to. But the girl’s distress was very real. She had a refined nature, and she took all Wales’s Wales’s Wales’s Wales’s Steve’s Steve’s extravagant love-making in resentful resentful not in resentful resentful earnest. We got but little variety in the way of food at that kitchen table, and there wasn’t enough of it anyway. So we apprentices used to keep alive by arts of our own—that is to say, we crept into the cellar nearly every night, by a private entrance which we had discovered, and we robbed the cellar of potatoes and onions and such things, and carried them down town down town down town down-town to the printing-office, where we slept on pallets on the floor, and cooked them at the stove and had very good times. Wales Wales Wales Wales Steve had a secret of cooking a potato which was noble and wonderful and all his own. Since his his Wales’s Wales’s his day I have seen a potato cooked in that way only once. It was when Wilhelm II, II, II. II., revised in pencil Emperor of Germany, commanded my presence at a private feed feed feed feed dinner toward the end of the year 1901. 1901 1901 (1901) typed in the margin And when that potato appeared on the table it surprised me out of my discretion and made me commit the unforgivable sin, before I could get a grip on my discretion again—that is to say, I made a joyful exclamation of welcome over the potato, addressing my remark to the Emperor at my side without waiting for him to take the first innings. I think he honestly tried to pretend that he was not shocked and outraged, but he plainly was; and so were the other half-dozen grandees who were present. They were all petrified, and nobody could have said a word if he had tried. The ghastly silence endured for as much as half a minute, and would have lasted until now, of course, if the Emperor hadn’t broken it himself, for no one else there would have ventured that. It was at half past at half past at half-past half-past six in the evening, and the frost did not get out of the atmosphere entirely until close upon midnight, when it did finally melt away—or wash away—under generous floods of beer. As I have indicated, Mr. Ament’s Ament’s Ament’s Ament’s S.’s S.’s economies were of a pretty close and rigid kind. By and by, when we apprentices were promoted from the basement to the ground floor and allowed to sit at the family table, along with the one journeyman, Pet McMurry, Pet McMurry, Pet MacMurray, Hobby queried ‘Pet’; her query was canceled in pencil Pet MacMurray, Harry H., Harry H., the economies continued. Mrs. Ament Ament Ament Ament S. S. was a bride. She had attained to that distinction very recently, after waiting a good part of a lifetime for it, and she was the right woman in the right place, according to the Amentian idea, Amentian idea, Amentian idea, Amentian idea, economics of the place, economics of the place, for she did not trust the sugar-bowl to us, but sweetened our coffee herself. That is is is is, is, she went through the motions. She didn’t really sweeten it. She seemed to put one heaping teaspoonful of brown sugar into each cup, but, according to Wales, Wales, Wales, Wales, Steve, Steve, that was a deceit. He said she dipped the spoon in the coffee first to make the sugar stick, and then scooped the sugar out of the bowl with the spoon upside-down upside-down upside-down upside down , so that the effect to the eye was a heaped-up spoon, whereas the sugar on it was nothing but a layer. This all seems perfectly true to me, and yet that thing would be so difficult to perform that I suppose it really didn’t happen, but was one of Wales’s Wales’s Wales’s Wales’s Steve’s Steve’s lies. I have said that Wales Wales Wales Wales Steve was reckless, and he was. It was the recklessness of ever-bubbling and indestructible good spirits flowing from the joy joy joys joy of youth. I think there wasn’t anything that that vast boy wouldn’t have done to have done to do to do to have done to procure five minutes’ entertainment for himself. One never knew where he would break out next. Among his shining characteristics was the most limitless and adorable irreverence. There didn’t seem to be anything serious in life for him; there didn’t seem to be anything that he revered. Once the celebrated founder of the at that time new and wide-spread sect called Campbellites, arrived in our village from from in from from Kentucky, and it made a prodigious excitement. The farmers and their families drove or tramped into the village from miles around to get a sight of the illustrious Alexander Campbell and to have a chance to hear him preach. When he preached in a church many had to be disappointed, for there was no church that would begin to hold all the applicants; so in order to accommodate all, he preached in the open air in the public square, and that was the first time in my life that I had realized what a mighty population this planet contains when you get them all together. He preached a sermon on one of these occasions which he had written especially for that occasion. All the Campbellites wanted it printed, so that they could save it and read it over and over again, and get it by heart. So they drummed up drummed up drummed up drummed up collected sixteen dollars, which was a large sum then, and for this great sum Mr. Ament great sum Mr. Ament great sum Mr. Ament great sum Mr. Ament money Mr. S. contracted to print five hundred copies of that sermon and put them in yellow paper covers. It was a sixteen-page duodecimo pamphlet, and it was a great event in our office. As we regarded it, it was a book, and it promoted us to the dignity of book printers. Moreover, no such mass of actual money as sixteen dollars, in one bunch, had ever entered that office on any previous occasion. People didn’t pay for their paper and for their advertising in money, they paid in dry-goods, sugar, coffee, hickory wood, oak wood, turnips, pumpkins, onions, watermelons watermelons water-melons —and it was very seldom indeed that a man paid in money, and when that happened we thought there was something the matter with him. We set up the great book in pages—eight pages to a form—and by help of a printer’s manual we managed to get the pages in their apparently crazy but really sane places on the imposing-stone. We printed that form on a Thursday. Then we set up the remaining eight pages, locked them into a form and struck a proof. Wales Wales Wales Wales Steve read the proof, and presently was aghast, for he had struck a snag. And it was a bad time to strike a snag, because it was Saturday; it was approaching noon; Saturday afternoon was our holiday, and we wanted to get away and go fishing. At such a time as this, Wales struck that snag and showed us what had happened. He had left out a couple of words in a thin-spaced thin-spaced thin-spaced thin-spaced page of solid matter and there wasn’t another break-line for two or three pages ahead. What in the world was to be done? Overrun all those pages in order to get in the the the the the two missing words? Apparently there was no other way. It would take an hour to do it. Then a revise must be sent to the great minister; we must wait for him to read the revise; if he encountered any errors we must correct them. It looked as if we might lose half the afternoon before we could get away. Then Wales had one of his brilliant ideas. In the line in which the “out” had been made occurred the name Jesus Christ. Wales reduced that that that name that to J. C. It made room for the missing words, but it took 99 per cent 99 per cent ninety-nine per cent. of the solemnity out of a particularly solemn sentence. We sent off the revise and waited. We were not intending to wait long. In the circumstances we meant to get out and go fishing before that revise should get back, but we were not speedy enough. Presently that great Alexander Campbell appeared at the far end of that sixty-foot room, and his countenance cast a gloom over the whole place. He strode down to our end and what he said was brief but it was very stern, and it was to the point. He read Wales a lecture. He said “So long as you live, don’t you ever diminish the Savior’s Savior’s Saviour’s name again. Put it all all all ‘all’ underscored all in.” He repeated this admonition a couple of times to emphasize it, then he went away. In that day the common swearers of the region had a way of their own of emphasizing emphasizing emphasizing ‘emphasizing’ underscored emphasizing the Savior’s Savior’s Saviousr’s ‘s’ mended to ‘r’ Saviour’s name when they were using it profanely, and this fact intruded itself into Wales’s incorrigible mind. It offered him an opportunity for a momentary entertainment which seemed to him to be more precious and more valuable than even fishing and swimming could afford. So he imposed upon himself the long and weary and dreary task of overrunning overrunning over-running overrunning all those three pages in order to improve upon his former work and incidentally and thoughtfully improve upon the great preacher’s admonition. He enlarged the offending J. C. into Jesus H. Christ. Wales knew that that would make prodigious trouble, and it did. But it was not in him to resist it. He had to succumb to the law of his make. I don’t remember what his punishment was, but he was not the person to care for that. He had already collected his dividend. It was during my first year’s apprenticeship apprenticeship apprenticeship apprecticeship in the Courier office that I did a thing which I have been trying to regret for fifty-five years. It was a summer afternoon and just the kind of weather that a boy prizes for river excursions and other frolics, but I was a prisoner. The others were all gone holidaying. I was alone and sad. I had committed a crime of some sort and this was the punishment. I must lose my holiday, and spend the afternoon in solitude besides. I had the printing-office all to myself, there in the third story. I had one comfort, and it was a generous one while it lasted. It was the half of a long and broad watermelon watermelon water-melon , fresh and red and ripe. I gouged it out with a knife, and I found accommodation for the whole of it in my person—though it did crowd me until the juice ran out of my ears. There remained then the shell, the hollow shell. It was big enough to do duty as a cradle. I didn’t want to waste it, and I couldn’t think of anything to do with it which could afford entertainment. I was sitting at the open window which looked out upon the sidewalk of the main street three stories below, when it occurred to me to drop it on somebody’s head. I doubted the judiciousness of this, and I had some compunctions about it too, because so much of the resulting entertainment would fall to my share and so little to the other person. But I thought I would chance it. I watched out of the window for the right person to come along—the safe person—but he didn’t come. Every time there was a candidate he or she turned out to be an unsafe one, and I had to restrain myself. But at last I saw the right one coming. It was my brother Henry. He was the best boy in the whole region. He never did harm to anybody, he never offended anybody. He was exasperatingly good. He had an overflowing abundance of goodness—but not enough to save him this time. I watched his approach with eager interest. He came strolling along, dreaming his pleasant summer dream and not doubting but that Providence had him in his care. If he had known where I was he would have had less confidence in that superstition. As he approached his form became more and more foreshortened. When he was almost under me he was so foreshortened that nothing of him was visible from my high place except except except expcecpt the end of his nose and his alternately approaching feet. Then I poised the watermelon watermelon water-melon , calculated my distance and let it go, hollow side down. The accuracy of that gunnery was beyond admiration. He had about six steps to make when I let that canoe go, and it was lovely to see those two bodies gradually closing in on each other each other each-other each other . If he had had seven steps to make, or five steps to make, my gunnery would have been a failure. But he had exactly the right number to make, and that shell smashed down right on the top of his head and drove him into the earth up to the chin. The chunks of that broken melon flew in every direction like a spray, and they broke third story windows all around. They had to get a jack such as they hoist buildings with to pull him out. I wanted to go down there and condole with him, but it would not have been safe. He would have suspected me at once. I expected him to suspect me anyway, but as he said nothing about this adventure for two or three days—I was watching him in the meantime in order to keep out of danger—I was deceived into believing that this time he didn’t suspect me. It was a mistake. He was only waiting for a sure opportunity. Then he landed a cobblestone cobblestone cobble-stone on the side of my head which raised a bump there so large that I had to wear two hats for a time. I carried this crime to my mother, for I was always anxious to get Henry into trouble with her and could never succeed. I thought that I had a sure case this time when she should come to see that murderous bump. I showed it to her but she said it was no matter. She didn’t need to inquire into the circumstances. She knew I had deserved it, and the best way would be for me to accept it as a valuable lesson, and thereby get profit out of it. About ¶ About ¶ About centered: Orion Clemens—resumed. ¶ Dictated March 28, 1906. About ¶ [Dictated March 28th, 1906.] About 1849 or 1850 Orion severed his connection with the printing-house in St. Louis and came up to Hannibal Hannibal Hannibal Hannibal, and bought a weekly paper called the Hannibal Journal, Journal, Journal, “Journal,” 1850 1850 1850 inserted in the margin (1850) typed in the margin (1850.) inset together with its plant and its good-will, for the sum of five hundred dollars cash. He borrowed the cash at 10 per cent 10 per cent ten per cent. interest, interest, interest, which was an illegal rate, interest, from an old farmer named Johnson who lived five miles out of town. Then he reduced the subscription price of the paper from two dollars to one dollar. He reduced the rates for advertising in about the same proportion, and thus he created one absolute and unassailable certainty—to wit: that the business would never pay him a single cent cent cent scent of profit. He took me out of the Courier Courier Courier Courier ‘Courier’ underscored “Courier” office and engaged my services in his own at three dollars and a half a week, which was an extravagant wage, but Orion was always generous, always liberal with everybody except himself. It cost him nothing in my case, for he never was able to pay me a penny penny single penny single penny penny as long as I was with him. By the end of the first year he found he must make some economies. The office rent was cheap, but it was not cheap enough. He could not afford to pay rent of any kind, so he moved the whole plant into the house we lived in, and it cramped the dwelling-place cruelly. He kept that paper alive during four years, but I have at this time no idea how he accomplished it. Toward the end of each year he had to turn out out around out out and scrape and scratch for the fifty dollars of interest due Mr. Johnson, and that fifty dollars was about the only cash he ever received or paid out, I suppose, while he was proprietor of that newspaper, except for ink and printing-paper. newspaper, except for ink and printing-paper. newspaper., except for ink and printing-paper. newspaper, except for ink and printing-paper. The paper was a dead failure. It had to be that from the start. Finally he handed it over to Mr. Johnson, and went up to Muscatine, Iowa, and acquired a small interest in a weekly newspaper there. It was not a sort of property to marry on—but no matter. He came across a winning and pretty girl who lived in Quincy Quincy Quincy Quniincy marked in pencil to transpose ‘n’ and ‘i’ , Illinois, a few miles below Keokuk, and they became engaged. He was always falling in love with girls, but by some accident or other he had never gone so far as engagement before. And now he achieved nothing but misfortune by it, because he straightway fell in love with a Keokuk girl—at least he imagined that he was in love with her, whereas I think she did the imagining for him. The first thing he knew he was engaged to her, and he was in a great quandary. He didn’t know whether to marry the Keokuk one or the Quincy one, or whether to try to marry both of them and suit every one concerned. But the Keokuk girl soon settled that for him. She was a master spirit and she ordered him to write the Quincy girl and break off that match, which he did. Then he girl—at . . . Then he girl—at . . . Then he girl—at least . . . Then he ‘—at . . . then’ bracketed and queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC girl. He married the Keokuk girl and they began a struggle for life which turned out to be a difficult enterprise, and very unpromising. To gain a living in Muscatine was plainly impossible, so Orion and his new wife went to Keokuk to live, for she wanted to be near her relatives. He bought a little bit of a job printing-plant job printing-plant job printing-plant job-printing plant —on credit, of course—and at once put prices down to where not even the apprentices could get a living out of it, and this sort of thing went on. I had not joined the Muscatine migration. Just before that happened (which I think 1853 1853 (1853) typed in the margin (1853.) inset was in 1853) I disappeared one night and fled to St. Louis. There I worked in the composing-room of the Evening News Evening News Evening News “Evening News” for a time, and then started on my travels to see the world. The world was New York City, and there was a little World’s Fair there. It had just been opened where the great reservoir afterward afterward afterward afterward was, and where the sumptuous public library is now being built—Fifth Avenue and 42d 42d 42nd Forty-second street street Street . I arrived in New York with two or three dollars in pocket change and a ten-dollar ten-dollar ten dollar ten-dollar bank-bill bank-bill bank bill bank-bill concealed in the lining of my coat. I got work at villainous wages in the establishment of John A. Gray and Green in Cliff street street Street , and I found board in a sufficiently villainous mechanics’ boarding-house in Duane street street Street . The firm paid my wages in wildcat money at its face value, and my week’s wage merely sufficed to pay board and lodging. By and by I went to Philadelphia and worked there some months as a “sub” “sub” “sub” “sub” on the Inquirer Inquirer Inquirer “Inquirer” and the Public Ledger. Public Ledger. Public Ledger. “Public Ledger.” Finally I made a flying trip to Washington to see the sights there, and in 1854 I went back 1854 1854 (1854) typed in the margin (1854.) inset to the Mississippi Valley, sitting upright in the smoking-car two or three days and nights. When I reached St. Louis I was exhausted. I went to bed on board a steamboat that was bound for Muscatine. I fell asleep at once, with my clothes on, and didn’t wake again for thirty-six hours. I I I * * * I revised in pencil . . . I worked in that little job office job office job office job-office in Keokuk as much as two years, I should say, without ever collecting a cent of wages, for Orion was never able to pay anything—but Dick Higham and I had good times. I don’t know what Dick got, but it was probably only uncashable promises. One day in the mid-winter mid-winter midwinter of 1856 or 1857—I think it was 1856—I was coming along the main street of Keokuk 1856 or 1857 1856 or 1857 (1856 or 1857) typed in the margin (1856) typed in the margin (1856.) inset in the middle of the forenoon. It was bitter weather—so bitter that that street was deserted, almost. A light dry snow was blowing here and there on the ground and on the pavement, swirling this way and that way and making all sorts of beautiful figures, but very chilly to look at. The wind blew a piece of paper past me and it lodged against a wall of a house. Something about the look of it attracted my attention and I gathered it in. It was a fifty-dollar bill, the only one I had ever seen, and the largest largest largest largest largest assemblage of money I had ever encountered encountered seen seen encountered revised blue pencil encountered in one spot. I advertised it in the papers and suffered more than a thousand dollars’ worth of solicitude and fear and distress during the next few days lest the owner should see the advertisement and come and take my fortune away. As many as four days went by without an applicant; then I could endure this kind of misery no longer. I felt sure that another four could not go by in this safe and secure way. I felt that I must take that money out of danger. So I bought a ticket for Cincinnati and went to that city. I worked there several months in the printing-office of Wrightson Wrightson Wrightson Hobby queried this word on TS1, and SLC canceled her query and Company. I had been reading Lieutenant Herndon’s account of his explorations of the Amazon and had been mightily attracted by what he said of coca coca cocoa coca . I made up my mind that I would go to the head-waters head-waters head-waters head waters of the Amazon and collect coca coca cocoa coca and trade in it and make a fortune. I left for New Orleans in the steamer Paul Jones Paul Jones Paul Jones “Paul Jones” with this great idea filling my mind. One of the pilots of that boat was Horace Bixby. Little by little I got acquainted with him, and pretty soon I was doing a lot of steering for him in his daylight watches. When I got to New Orleans I inquired about ships leaving for Pará Pará Paraá accent added Paraá accent added Pará and discovered that there weren’t weren’t wasn’t weren’t weren’t any, and learned that there probably wouldn’t be any during that century. It had not occurred to me to inquire about these particulars before leaving Cincinnati, so there I was. I couldn’t get to the Amazon. I had no friends in New Orleans and no money to speak of. I went to Horace Bixby and asked him to make a pilot out of me. He said he would do it for a hundred a hundred one hundred one a hundred revised in blue pencil a hundred dollars cash in advance. So I steered for him up to St. Louis, borrowed the money from my brother-in-law and closed the bargain. I had acquired this brother-in-law several years before. This was Mr. William A. Moffett, a merchant, a Virginian—a fine man in every way. He had married my sister Pamela, and the Samuel E. Moffett of whom I have been speaking was their son. Within eighteen months I became became was become was becoame revised in pencil became a competent pilot, and I served that office until the Mississippi River traffic was brought to a standstill by the breaking out of the Civil War Civil War civil war . Meantime Meantime Meantime * * * *Meantime . . . Meantime Orion had been sweating along with his been sweating along with his been sweating along with his been sweating along with his gone down the river and established a gone down the river and established a his revised in pencil gone down the river and established his little job-printing office job-printing office job office job printing office job-printing office job-printing-office in Keokuk, and he and his wife were living with his wife’s family—ostensibly as boarders, but it is not likely that Orion was ever able to pay the board. Keokuk, and . . . board. Keokuk, and . . . board. Keokuk, and . . . board. ‘and . . . board.’ bracketed and queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC, who also retraced the brackets in blue pencil Keokuk. On account of charging next to next to not in next to next to nothing for the work done in his job office job office job office job-office , he had almost nothing to do there. He was never able to get it through his head get it through his head get it through his head get it through his head comprehend comprehend that work done on a profitless basis deteriorates and is presently not worth anything, and that customers are then then not in then then obliged to go where they can get better work, even if they must pay better prices for it. He had plenty of time, and he took up Blackstone again. He also put up a sign which offered his services to the public as a lawyer. He never got a case, in those days, nor even an applicant, although he was quite willing to transact law business for nothing and furnish the stationery himself. He was always liberal that way. Presently he moved to a wee little hamlet called Alexandria, two or three miles down the river, and he put up that sign there. He got no bites. bites. bites. bites. custom. custom. He was by this time very hard aground. But by this time I was beginning to earn a wage of two hundred and fifty dollars a month as pilot, and so I supported him thenceforth until 1861, 1861 1861 (1861) typed in the margin (1861.) inset when his ancient friend, Edward Bates, then a member of Mr. Lincoln’s first cabinet, cabinet, cabinet cabinet, cabinet, got him the place of Secretary of the new Territory of Nevada, and Orion and I cleared for that country in the overland stage-coach, I paying the fares, which were pretty heavy, and carrying with me what money I had been able to save—this was eight hundred dollars, I should say—and it was all in silver coin and a good deal of a nuisance because of its weight. And we had another nuisance, which was an Unabridged Dictionary. It weighed about a thousand pounds, and was a ruinous expense, because the stage-coach Company charged for extra baggage by the ounce. We could have kept a family for a time on what that dictionary cost in the way of extra freight—and it wasn’t a good dictionary anyway—didn’t have any modern words in it—only had obsolete ones ones words ones ones that they used to use when Noah Webster was a child.