8 November 1906 Thursday, November 8, 1906 Thursday, November 8, 1906 Wednesday, Oct. 31, Thursday, Nov. 8, 1906. Wednesday, Oct. 31, Thursday, Dictated Nov. 8, 1906 1906. [Dictated, November 8, 1906.] SLC revised the date and then substituted ‘Dictated’ for the day; Munro deleted the entire dateline and reinserted it to precede ‘I have’ at 270.11 [Dictated, November 8, 1906].* placed before ‘I have’ at 270.11 From Susy’s Biography Biography biography : Mr. Clemens thinks he will write no more books—Mr. Clemens’s inability to remember faces of friends—The exquisite faces and landscapes which his mind draws and paints when he is half asleep—He has not yet written himself out; prefers dictating—Mrs. Riggs recalls the episode of F. Hopkinson Smith selling the original manuscripts manuscripts MSS. at auction—The artists’ artists’ artists dinner for Hopkinson Smith. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. of Me. ‘From Susy’s Biography of Me.’ underscored From Susy’s Biography of Me. Feb. 12, ’86. Feb. 12, ’86. Feb. 12, ’86. Feb. 12, ’86. Mamma and I have both been very much troubled of late because papa since he has been publishing Gen. Grant’s book has seemed to forget his own books and work entirely, and the other evening as papa and I were promonading promonading promeonading promonading up and down the library he told me that he didn’t expect to write but one more book, and then he was ready to give up work altogether, die, or do anything, he said that he had written more than he had ever expected to, and the only book that he had been pertickularly anxious to write was one locked up in the safe down stairs, not yet published.It isn’t yet. Title of it, “Captain Stormfield’s Visit to Heaven.” S.L.C. published.* footnote: *It isn’t yet. Title of it, “Captain Stormfield’s Visit to Heaven.” S.L.C. published.* footnote: *It is not published yet. S.L.C. Title of it, “Captain Stormfield’s Visit to Heaven.” S.L.C. asterisks interted in pencil, probably by Hobby published.* footnote: *It isn’t not yet. S.L.C. Title of it, “Captain Stormfield’s Visit to Heaven.” S.L.C. asterisks inserted in pencil, probably by Munro published.* footnote: *It isn’t yet. Title of it, “Captain Stormfield’s Visit to Heaven.”—S.L.C. published.† footnote: †It isn’t yet. Title of it, “Captain Stormfield’s Visit to Heaven.”—S.L.C. But this intended future of course will never do, and although papa usually holds to his own opinions and intents with outsiders, when mamma realy desires anything and says that it must be, papa allways gives up his plans (at least so far) and does as she says is right (and she is usually right, if she dissagrees with him at all). It was because he knew his great tendency to being convinced by her, that he published without her knowledge that article in the “Christian Union” concerning the government of children. So judging by the proofs of past years, I think that we will be able to persuade papa to go back to work as before, and not leave off writing with the end of his next story. Mamma says that she sometimes feels, and I do too, that she would rather have papa depend on his writing for a living than to have him think of giving it up. I have [¶] I have Ever since papa and mamma were married papa has written his books and then taken them to mamma in manuscript and she has expergated them. Papa read “Huckleberry Finn” to us in manuscript just before it came out, and then he would leave parts of it with mamma to expergate, while he went off up to the study to work, and sometimes Clara and I would be sitting with Mamma while she was looking the manuscript over, and I remember so well, with what pangs of regret we used to see her turn down the leaves of the pages, which meant that some delightfully dreadful part must be scratched out. And I remember one part pertickularly which was perfectly fascinating it was dreadful, that Clara and I used to delight in, and oh with what dispair we saw mamma turn down the leaf on which it was written, we thought the book would be almost ruined without it. But we gradually came to feel as mamma did. [¶] I have Ever since . . . as mamma did. not in a defect of a sort which I think is not common; certainly I hope it isn’t: it isn’t: it isn’t. It isn’t:. Iit period mended to a colon; ‘I’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ isn’t: it is rare that I can call before my mind’s eye the form and face of either friend or enemy. If I should make a list, now, of persons whom I know in America and abroad—say to the number of even an entire thousand— even an entire thousand— a hundred— a hundred— even an entire thousand— even an entire thousand— it is quite unlikely that I could reproduce five of them in my mind’s eye. Of my dearest and most intimate friends, I could name eight whom I have seen and talked with four days ago, but when I try to call them before me they are formless shadows. Jean has been absent, this past eight or ten days, at a Sanatorium at a Sanatorium at a Sanatorium at a Sanatorium not in in the country, and I wish I could reproduce her in the mirror of my mind, but I can’t do it. There was a dinner party here last night, all old friends of ours. I recall how Mrs. Kate Douglas Wiggin Riggs looked; also how Dorothea Gilder looked; but I can get only blurred and scarcely recognizable glimpses of Norman Hapgood and Mrs. Hapgood, Mr. Riggs, and Clara Clemens. There was . . . Clara Clemens. There was . . . Clara Clemens. There was . . . Clara Clemens. not in It may be that this defect is not constitutional, but a result of life-long life-long life-long lifelong absence of mind and indolent and inadequate observation. Once or twice in my life it has been an embarrassment to me. Twenty years ago, in the days of Susy’s Biography Biography bBiography bBiography of Me ‘b’ capitalized by SLC, ‘of Me’ inserted by Munro Biography of Me , there was a dispute one morning at the breakfast table breakfast table breakfast table breakfast-table about the color of a neighbor’s eyes. I was asked for a verdict, but had to confess that if that valued neighbor and old friend had eyes I was not sure that I had ever seen them. It was then mockingly suggested that perhaps I didn’t even know the color of the eyes of my own family, and I was required to shut my own at once and testify. I was able to name the color of Mrs. Clemens’s eyes, but was not able to even suggest a color for Jean’s, or Clara’s, or Susy’s. This defect seems to be out of place with me. It would seem to indicate that I have no sense of form and proportion or I would have memory of them, since each faculty has a memory of its own. I think I ought to be able to recall forms and faces, because, although I can neither draw nor paint, my mind often often often draws and paints the most exquisite and the most faultless faces—faces of strangers always—when when sometimes when I am almost asleep but yet dimly conscious of my surroundings. These faces are very small. In size and quality they are like the old-fashioned ivory miniatures; like, but not just like, for they are much more dainty and charming and beautiful than any ivory miniatures that I have ever seen; by contrast with them the ivory miniature is coarse and unspiritual. unspiritual. un-comely. spiritual. I may not have a monopoly in this kind of art, but I have an idea that more people lack it than possess it. My half-asleep mind has drawn and painted for me thousands upon thousands of these lovely faces, but I think I can say with certainty that not once has the face of a friend or an acquaintance appeared among them. It is a pity, for if my dead could come back in that gracious form, form, form, form that weird art would have a priceless value for me. There is another form of picture-making which my mind, when I am but half conscious, shares with the rest of the world, I suppose; that is the production of faces of about half normal size in black and white black and white black-and-white , never in color; faces that laugh, faces that grin, faces that swiftly undergo all sorts of pleasant and unpleasant contortions; faces that continuously dissolve away and vanish, but instantly reappear with new features and with new “stunts” “stunts” “stunts” stunts to exhibit, to use the slang phrase. With me, these faces, like the miniature faces, are always new to me; they never favor me with a countenance which I have ever seen before. The landscapes which rise upon my drowsing drowsing drowsying mind properly belong with the miniatures, for they are projected on a very small scale. They seem close by, but they look as they would look to a Gulliver in Lilliput. There will be a lake; there will be a rim of delicate mountains mountains mountains steeped in soft sunlight; there will be little bays with miniature white sand beaches; there will be capes and headlands projecting into the dimpling blue water; and the whole landscape—lake, mountains and all—will be so little that it will look as if it might be framed and hung upon the wall. All this talk is suggested by Susy’s remark: “The other evening as papa and I were promonading up and down the library”—— Thank God library”—— Thank God library”—— Thank God library.”—— Thank God Down to the bottom of my heart I am thankful that library.” Down to the bottom of my heart I am thankful that I can see that that that ‘that’ underscored that picture! picture! picture.! period mended to an exclamation point picture! and and and aAnd And it is not dim, but stands out clear in the unfaded light of twenty-one twenty-one twenty twenty-one twenty-one years ago. In those days Susy and I used to “promonade” daily up and down the library, with our arms about each other’s waists, and deal in intimate communion concerning affairs of State, or the deep questions of human life, or our small personal affairs. It was quite natural that I should think I had written myself out when I was only fifty years old, for everybody who has ever written has been smitten with that superstition at about that age. Not even yet have I really written myself out. I have merely stopped writing because dictating is pleasanter work, and because dictating has given me a strong aversion to the pen, and because two hours of talking per day is enough, and because— But because— But because—— □ bBut symbol for an em space because—— □ bBut symbol for an em space because— But I am only damaging my mind with this digging around in it for pretexts where no pretext is needed, and where the simple truth is for this one time better than any invention, in this small emergency. I shall never finish my five or six unfinished books, for the reason that by forty years of slavery to the pen I have earned my freedom. I detest the pen, pen, pen, pen and I wouldn’t use it again to to even to even to to sign the death-warrant death-warrant death warrant of my dearest enemy. Fifteen years ago. . . . However I am reminded of something that occurred here at dinner last night; in fact I am reminded of several things that occurred here at dinner last night. Mrs. Riggs seemed to me to be almost as young and beautiful as she was a quarter of a century ago, and certainly she was as bright and charming as ever she was in her life. I couldn’t look at her without thinking of F. Hopkinson Smith, successful successful successful novelist, acceptable public reader, acceptable after-dinner talker, talker, orator, talker, acceptable water-color artist, acceptable architect, and of high repute as a builder of lighthouses and great iron bridges. I couldn’t possibly ever look at Mrs. Riggs and not instantly think of F. Hopkinson Smith. About a dozen years ago there was a great gathering one night at Sherry’s, in aid of one of those charities where a crowd gets together at an an any expensive place like that and spends four thousand dollars for things to eat and collects thirty-seven dollars and a half for the charity—usually by an auction sale of things which nobody values and nobody wants. The auction this time was of original manuscripts, presumably in autograph form. F. Hopkinson Smith was the auctioneer. In those days his reputation as a writer was just barely budding; he was hardly known, but he probably didn’t know it. He certainly is a man of many talents, and good ones, too, but several of them are not as good as he thinks they are. He began the auction with a literary production of his own, a short story. It was a typewritten manuscript; it was merely autographed at the end. He made proclamation, and, to encourage the house, he started the bidding himself—at fifty dollars for the property. He auctioned away very energetically, and with good staying power, and finally succeeded in selling the asset at an advance upon his own bid. energetically, and . . . bid. energetically for a while, but in the end he got the manuscript himself., and . . . bid. Then he put up an original manuscript of Mrs. Riggs’s, all in her own handwriting; but as he didn’t start the bidding this time there was an embarrassed pause, he he Smith he barking away vigorously all through it but not raising a bid, for the people had been discouraged by the pace he he Smith he had set. By and by somebody had the courage to start a bid—two dollars and a half—and Smith worked and sweated over it most manfully, because he had by this time realized realized perceived realized what a mistake he had made in the beginning and what a particularly unpleasant mistake it was for all concerned— concerned— concerned;— and everybody in the house was concerned. Well, never mind what the final result was—it is gone from my memory, and was never important anyway. At the end of the evening Mrs. Riggs and Mrs. Mary Mapes Dodge met in the dressing-room, and Mrs. Dodge said with immense enthusiasm, “Kate Douglas Wiggin, there aren’t any words that can express the admiration I feel for you. It was wonderful that you could hold your temper, in the circumstances; it was marvelous that you didn’t break out out out there and tell that man what you thought of him.” Mrs. Riggs said, “Oh yes, yes, I wanted to, but you know I am a lady, and I have to be so damned particular! particular! particular.! period mended to an exclamation point particular. ” And I can’t ever think of Smith without thinking of a luncheon party of artists which gathered itself together in Chase’s spacious and sumptuous studio years and years ago when Hopkinson Smith’s large fame as an artist had just begun to flicker and spit and spit and spit not in and make itself vaguely visible in the twilight of public observation. He was at the luncheon, and, and, and, typed correction and being new, the artists were very kind to him, very complimentary, and did everything they could to make him feel at home. It may be that in trying so hard to be sufficiently kind they overdid it. At any rate, when the speeches had been going on for a good while, while, while, while an artist who had been unconsciously and unintentionally unintentionally unintelligently unintentionally qualifying himself to take a chance in the debate, rose up and stood with roving and genial eye, and supporting his general unsteadiness by leaning his forefinger on the table; table; table,; comma mended to a semicolon table, he licked his lips several times, several times, several times, and then said, “I’ve (hic) (hic) (hic,) (hic) been hearing a tiresome complimentary lot about this Mr. Hop-skip-and-jumpkinson Smith; Smith; Smith,; comma mended to a semicolon Smith, and if he he he ‘he’ underscored ain’t too tired too tired too tired to too tired to faintly typed ‘oo’ and second ‘t’ retraced in ink I (hic) (hic) (hic) want to see him get up and do do do ‘do’ underscored do it! it! it.! period mended to an exclamation point it. ”