12 October 1906 Friday, October 12, 1906 Friday, October 12, 1906 Friday, Oct. 12, 1906. [Friday, October 2, 1906] placed before ‘. . . I can’t’ at 256.8 [Friday, October 12, 1906] placed before ‘. . . I can’t’ at 256.8 Redpath and the jayhawker chief at the press press Press dinner in Boston. I broke off there yesterday, in the middle of a sentence, because I saw that my word-stream was dammed up again, and I couldn’t make it flow. I can’t I can’t I can’t . . . I can’t think of the name of that dare-devil dare-devil dare-devil daredevil guerrilla who led the jayhawkers and chased Redpath up and down the country, and, in turn, was chased by Redpath. By grace of the chances of war, the two men never met in the field, met in the field, met, in the field, met in the field, though they several times came within an ace of it. Ten or twelve years later, Redpath was earning his living in Boston as chief chief Chief chief of the lecture business in the United States. Fifteen or sixteen years after his Kansas adventures I became a public lecturer, and he was my agent. Along there somewhere was was there was was a press press Press press dinner, one November night, at the Tremont Hotel in Boston, and I attended it. I sat near the head of the table, with Redpath between me and the chairman; a stranger sat chairman; a stranger sat chairman, and a stranger chairman; a stranger sat on my other side. I tried several times to talk with the stranger, but he seemed to be out of words and I presently ceased from troubling him. He was manifestly a very shy man, and, moreover, he might might may might have been losing sleep the night before. The first man called up was Redpath. At the mention of the name the stranger started, and showed interest. He fixed a fascinated eye on Redpath, and lost not a word of his speech. Redpath told some stirring incidents of his career in Kansas, and said, among other things: said, among other things: said:, among other things: said, among other things: “Three times I came near capturing the gallant jayhawker jayhawker jay-hawker jayhawker chief, and once he actually captured me me me me , but didn’t know me and let me go, because he said he was hot on Redpath’s trail and couldn’t afford to waste time and rope on inconsequential small-fry small-fry small-fry small fry .” My stranger was called up next, and when Redpath heard his name he, in turn, he, in turn, he, in turn, he, in turn, showed a startled interest. The stranger said, bending a caressing glance upon Redpath and speaking gently—I may even say sweetly— sweetly— sweetly— sweetly: “You realize that I was that jayhawker chief. I am glad to know you now and take you to my heart and call you friend”—then he added, in a voice that was pathetic with regret, “but if I had only known you then, what tumultuous happiness I should have had in your society!— society!— society!— society!— while it lasted.” I lost my sleep again last night; it is plain that it is plain that it is plain that the mill will not grind, to-day; grind, to-day; grind, to-day; I give it up and shall not try to dictate again until next Monday.