7 August 1906 Tuesday, August 7, 1906 Mr. Clemens expresses his gratitude to Mr. Rogers—Describes the man as one of the three three 3 handsomest men in America. America. America— America. Who saves my soul does me a service; who saves my family’s bread and butter does me a service that is worth thirty of it. For I am well acquainted with my soul, and know its value to a farthing. For I am well acquainted with my soul, and know its value to a farthing. not in For I am well acquainted with my soul, and know its value to a farthing. To Reverend Reverend Rev. Joseph H. Twichell I owe thanks for the impending halo, thanks for the impending halo, acknowledgments; thanks for the impending halo, to Mr. Rogers I owe I owe not in I owe gratitude. A person’s soul is not an asset of serious importance, serious importance, much importance serious importance, now that hell hell Hell hell has become so doubtful. In this world we can get along without it, and many many so many many , many of us do. Its condition and prospects interest us in a colorless and perfunctory way, Sundays, but do not go to the heart and set a grip upon it. It is the peril of the wife and children’s bread and butter that does that. When the bread and butter of one’s dearest in all the world is in danger, that person realizes that he stands in the presence of a tremendous reality reality reality reality , and that by comparison with this sharp and searching exigency, the saving of his soul is a light matter and can be put off to another time. I will take up these theological aspects in a future chapter and thresh them out—but for the present I will return to business. There are many and various kinds of sacrifice which a person can make for his friend, but I think the highest and greatest greatest kindliest greatest of them them them all them is his sacrifice of time and labor in the cause. Mr. Rogers gave a part of his time, daily, during several weeks, to the straightening out of my Paige entanglements; he entanglements; he entanglements. He entanglements; he gave many weeks of his time to the arranging of an agreement between the American Publishing Company and the Harpers Harpers Harper’s Harpers whereby I got the use of my Harper books in a completed set to be issued by the former Company; he Company; he Company. He Company; he had the Webster matter on his hands for five years; three years; three years. Three years; three years ago he labored at another contract between the two the two the two two publishing firms and myself during a good many weeks, and at last got it accomplished and signed—a contract which released me from slavery to two masters and left me in the happier condition of servant to only one—the Harper Corporation Corporation corporation . Any one who has served two masters in this world will understand the almost inestimable value of this modification. Mr. Rogers’s time is worth several thousand dollars an hour, and I have had almost daily use of it for thirteen years; he years; he years. He years; he has not charged me anything for it, therefore I stand morally indebted to him in the sum of several millions of dollars. He could have sold it to great corporations for that—but I am aware that he is always squandering his time and talent and labor in a spendthrift fashion upon his friends, and so I argue that he gets more pleasure and more satisfaction out of working for his friends for nothing than he would get out of working for those other people at Standard Oil wages. wages. extra line of space wages. no extra line of space wages. extra line of space Mr. Rogers is a very handsome man, man, man— man, symmetrically formed, compactly compactly beautifully compactly constructed; he is warm-hearted warm-hearted warm hearted warm-hearted , affectionate, and as sensitive as a woman. He has a wellspring wellspring spring well-spring well-spring of humor in him that never runs dry, and an infallible perception of humor humor it humor in others. He is sixty-seven years old by the almanac, but otherwise only twenty-five, and is as lively and companionable as any other youth of his age. When he is conducting a stern business matter with his peers, peers, peers peers, his eye knows how to take care of its affairs, but when none but friends are around it is as frank and as candid as an eagle’s; eagle’s; eagle’s, eagle’s; and out of it looks—if my affection is not deceiving me—the spirit of that which resides within: within: within— within: within; high-mindedness, honor, honesty. His pictures do not do him justice. It is the common fault of pictures. Thirteen years ago, when I first knew him, he and two others were the especially especially specially especially handsome men of America. Those others Those others The other two Those others were Choate and Twichell. I was not in the competition at that time. I think that those three are still the handsomest men in America, though this cannot be determined by their pictures, because of the inadequacy of pictures in general. Half an hour ago a darling little creature, in summer frock and with her hair hanging in plaited plaited platted plaited tails down her back, arrived here, and I put my arm around her shoulders and snuggled snuggled pressed snuggled her head against my breast and inquired, and acquired, her name. Presently Presently Then Presently she said, “I have never seen you before, but I knew you by your pictures.” Then she nestled her head back, tilted up her face, face, face face, and looked sweetly up and added, added, said added, “But they are not half so beautiful beautiful nice beautiful as you are.” I was aware of it before, but to please her I pretended that it was a discovery, and that this was the first time any one had exhibited so delicate and so just a penetration. Those three men are extravagantly and satisfyingly handsome, but I doubt if Henry Rogers is second in the competition. It is an old saying that whatever is unpleasant in a person’s character and disposition will come out at sea, and that if he has any disagreeable infirmities of temper he will not be able to conceal them on shipboard. I have made a great many voyages with Mr. Rogers and his friends in his yacht, and his character and disposition always stood the test. He was always genial, always courteous, always diligently thoughtful of others. On land it is the same. Consider that most temper-trying game—billiards. When Mr. Rogers painstakingly tries for an easy shot and misses it a couple of yards and I burst into an unfeeling laugh, he does not resent it, he only leans on his cue and looks wounded, and says “I should be sorry to have a disposition like yours.” One would think I am painting an angel; but it is only a future one. Consider . . . says . . . one. not in Consider . . . says . . . one. Consider . . . says, . . . one. If there is a better man among us, a cleaner man, a kindlier man, a man with fewer faults, I have not met him. In mid-July, 1895, Mrs. Clemens and Clara and I started on our lecturing and book-making money-grubbing raid around the globe, and every day we melted a layer off the Webster debt. At the end of two and a half years we had earned the necessary money, then Mr. Rogers paid off all of the ninety-six creditors at one sitting. We still had ten thousand dollars in bank in London, and eighteen thousand five hundred dollars left over in his hands in New York. We were living in Vienna. I sent over and asked him to bet on Federal Steel with the eighteen thousand five hundred dollars. He bought the stock, and after two or three months he sold it for considerably more than twice the figure he had paid for it. The wolf has not molested our door since. Whenever I have trusted Mr. Rogers to invest my savings for me I have prospered; but nearly every time that I have stealthily and clandestinely crept into the market and invested them on my own judgment I have got struck by lightning. In . . . two and a half . . . eighteen thousand five hundred dollars . . . lightning. not in In . . . two-and-a-half . . . $18,500 . . . lightning. Now let us go back to the beginning and see if we can adequately adequately not in adequately do up that man—No. 14 14 13 14 in the blatherskite gallery. No, gentle stenographer, gentle stenographer, not in gentle stenographer, put up your pencil—this is not the time. I don’t seem to be loaded—and when I take hold of him I want to warm him up so competently that when he lands at his final home Satan will be obliged to say “You can come in if you like, but after what you have been through with my nephew we’ve nothing fresh to offer you here.” here.” here!” here.” The man has done me no harm, but I have never liked his complexion. The man has done me no harm, but I have never liked his complexion. The man has done me no harm, but I have never liked his complexion. not in