29 January 1907 Tuesday, January 29, 1907 Comments on the hand “readings” which precede this instalment—Mr. Clemens’s Clemens’s Clemens’s recent visit to the German clairvoyant, who tells him some correct details of his life—All the experts agree that he is to live to very old age—Appointment with Wilkerson, who says same thing about long life—Remarks about the New Orleans fortune-teller, and letter mentioned which Mr. Clemens wrote to Orion at the time in regard to the visit. Those hand “readings” were made two years ago, at the suggestion of Colonel Colonel Col. Harvey, who wanted them for Harper’s Weekly. I was to comment upon the “readings;” then Harvey was to comment upon my comments, with the best severity he could command. I liked the scheme. I pressed my hands upon an inked roller in the printing-office; then pressed them upon sheets of white paper; the reproductions were sharp and clear. These were sent to the experts, (with experts, (with experts, (with no name attached,) attached,) attached,) and when the “readings” founded upon them reached Harvey I wrote out wrote out made wrote out my comments upon them, but Harvey went on neglecting his end of the agreement until the manuscript was mislaid and the matter forgotten. But last week a circumstance recalled it to my mind, and we made a search and found my copy of it among my accumulation of unused manuscripts. That circumstance was this: I was invited to come to the house of an acquaintance up town up town up-town and witness the performance of a clairvoyant who was said to possess extraordinary powers. I gladly went. I found twenty ladies there, but none of the other sex except the host and the clairvoyant. The clairvoyant was a portly portly portly, middle-aged gentleman with a smooth round face and honest eyes, good eyes, candid eyes. His manner was Germanically simple, unaffected, and engaging. He was on his feet, talking. His English was good, with just enough of his own nationality about it to give it a pleasant alien flavor. There was one vacant place; it was in the middle of a short sofa, sofa, sofa, between two ladies whom I did not know, but who whispered their names to me and made me properly and comfortably welcome. Ladies generally do this, for I have a winning way with me which I learned in a hand-book of etiquette. The clairvoyant had distributed a number of slips of paper among the ladies, and had asked them to write questions upon the slips and crumple them up in their hands and wait until he called for them. He presently began the call. He said to a lady, lady, lady “Please hold up your fist, with your paper gripped in it, and I will tell you what you have written.” The lady held up her fist, and the clairvoyant said, “I cannot make out this writing very well; there is a word in it which I do not know. If I see it right, it is c-r-o-i-s-e-t.” (The ladies all laughed.) laughed.) laughed). The clairvoyant continued: “You laugh at my spelling, but that is as I see it, although I may be wrong. The question says, ‘Shall I receive it in time from Croiset?’ ” A quiet, happy, and unanimous laugh followed this, and the clairvoyant said: “Now I understand; Croiset is the name of a person, and that person is making a gown for the lady and she wishes to know if she is going to receive it in time—the time stipulated. I am glad to be able to inform her that she will receive it in time.” The lady was asked if the reading was correct, and she said it was. After this, this, this, several fists were held up; the clairvoyant read their contents; the accuracy of his readings was verified by inspection. Three of these papers were passed to me, and I saw that the clairvoyant had read them correctly. No doubt all the others present were familiar with this kind of miracle, but as I had never encountered it before, before, before, it filled me with wonder and admiration. By and by the clairvoyant said, “But this is monotonous. I would like to do something better—something better entitled to your attention. I would like to tell a little part of somebody’s biography. Would that gentleman permit it, in his case?”—indicating case?”—indicating case?”—“indicating me. “I do not know his name; I have never seen him before; I have never heard of him; he is a total stranger to me, but if he will go into a private room with me I will tell him some of his history.” It didn’t ring true. It probably didn’t ring true to anybody present there. I knew it could easily be true, nevertheless, and that it was not fair to give hospitality to my suspicions; still he had seemed to me to protest too much. I said I should be glad to go to the private room with him, so we went. He tore some slips from a small pad, and said, said, said “Write on one of them the maiden name of your mother. Write upon each of the others a question—any question you please.” He pulled aside the cloth and exposed the naked surface of the polished mahogany table. He said “You must have nothing underneath the paper but a hard surface like that. If you wrote upon a soft surface the pencil would leave an indentation which a person with an abnormally delicate touch could read with his fingers.” Then he stepped to the other side of the room and said to a housemaid who was at some kind of work there, “Sprechen Sie Deutsch Deutsch Deutch ?” The girl said she couldn’t speak it much, but she could understand it. Then the conversation went on, in German, and I presently said, “I have finished.” He said “Crumple the slips of paper up, put one of them in your vest pocket, hide one in your spectacle-case, shove another inside of your glove, and hold the other two in your fists.” I did as he directed. Then he came and sat at the table and rapidly wrote some sentences on a pad, then turned the pad upside-down, and said: “Your mother’s maiden name was Jane Lampton. Is that so?” “Yes.” “She had nine children?” “Yes, I think she had. I know she had eight, and I think there were nine.” “In what part of this procession was your place?” “I was No. 5 No. 5 number five , if there were eight children; I was No. 6 No. 6 number six , if there were nine.” “Were you twelve years old when you began to earn your living?” “Yes.” “Were you thirty-four when you married?” “Yes.” “You became the father of four children?” “Yes.” Then he said, “The paper in your vest pocket gives your mother’s maiden name, Jane Lampton; the one in your spectacle-case asks how many children she had; the one in your glove—” And so on. I took the crumpled papers from their concealment and found that he had located them correctly, and had delivered their contents with accuracy. He then turned his pad right-side up and handed it to me. What he had written upon it was this: Your Your “Your SLC wrote ‘solid’ twice next to the quotation that begins here mother, mother, mother, Jane Lampton, Lampton, Lampton; had nine children and you were her sixth child. At the age of twelve years you began to earn your own way of living and when thirty-four years old you married and became the father of four children, and you have surprised many people who have known you from childhood, by by of by your success. success. success.” I was full of astonishment—an astonishment which lasted me the rest of the afternoon; but at dinner, in the evening, when I was telling about this adventure, a new suspicion rose in my mind, for I remembered that only a week or two ago I had published a chapter of this Autobiography in which I had stated my mother’s maiden name, and the names of her children, up to eight, and that either in that chapter or in one which preceded it, I had told how old I was when I began to earn my own living, and all about my marriage and my children. And so my doubts crowded in upon me and spoiled the pleasure which the clairvoyant’s surprising performance had furnished me. Still there was one remark of his whose interest for me survived. He said it over twice, and assured me that it would come exactly true. This is it: “You will live to be ninety-eight years, ten months, and two days old, and will not have a serious illness in all that time, and you will die in a foreign land.” This had an interest for me—a distinctly depressing interest—for I do not wish to live forever, either here or elsewhere. It had another interest for me, too, for I remembered that those experts whose “readings” of my hands hands hands , two years ago, I have already mentioned, had been in irritating and offensive agreement upon that very thing—my liability to overstay my time here—much as they differed about me in other regards. One of them had said I was to outlive the Scriptural time-limit time-limit time-limit , and it has since come true. Another, whom I will call Wilkerson, which is not his name, said I had a long life-line life-line life-line ; and the third expert—whom I take to be a man without a conscience—said I would live to be ninety-five. This vicious unanimity moved me to examine into the matter further, so I made an appointment with Wilkerson and went to his place, under my own proper name, and he examined my hands for me. He said he had seen me more than once on the platform, years ago, and had often wanted to read my hands. During the next hour he told me all about my character, and I found that it still remained about as he had discovered it to be two years ago. Of course he couldn’t refrain from malignities about my old-age old-age old-age possibilities; toward the end, I was going to ask him about them, but he forestalled me, and said, “You will live to be close upon a century old, and you will not die in your own country.” In the course of our talk, coincidences were mentioned. He said, “When your secretary telephoned me about this appointment, yesterday evening, I had just read in the evening paper of the death of Mrs. Hooker; it brought you to my mind, for of course you would know Mrs. Hooker, you and she being residents of Hartford for so many years.” years.” years.”, I said, said, said, “Now “Now “Now we have come upon another coincidence. Fifteen minutes before my secretary telephoned you, she had answered a long-distance telephone call from Dr. Hooker in Hartford, asking me to act as a pall-bearer at his mother’s funeral. And there is still still still another one. Mr. Paine has been at his country home for a week, and on Thursday my secretary was writing him, and asked me if I had any word to send. At five o’clock on the previous afternoon I had fallen up the front steps of this house and peeled off from my starboard shin a ribbon of skin three inches long. This disaster being still in my mind, where it had persistently and urgently and urgently and urgently been for twenty-four hours, I said, “ ‘Tell “ ‘Tell “Tell him I am sorry he fell and skinned his shin at five o’clock yesterday afternoon.’ afternoon.’ afternoon.” “When “When When his answering letter came, next day, it answering letter came, next day, it answering letter came, next day, he it said, “ ‘I “ ‘I “I did did did ‘did’ underscored fall and skin my shin at five o’clock yesterday afternoon, but how did Mr. Clemens find it out?’ ” out?’ ” out?” These shin-skinnings shin-skinnings skinned-shinnings had actually occurred at the same hour, on the same day, and if it were not so serious a matter, it would be funny. Two years ago, when my secretary was examining my brother Orion’s autobiography autobiography Autobiography , she found in it a copy of a letter which I had written from a steamboat on the Mississippi River to my brother Orion in February 1861 when I was twenty-five years old—as I cipher it. I was born almost at the extreme end of 1835, and I hope to never be born again, it is so much trouble to me to cipher from my birth-date birth-date birth-date and find out how old I am; oftener than any other way, I am a year out in the calculation one way or the other. Evidently my my this my letter had impressed Orion very much, and he had copied it faithfully, word for word, and put it into his autobiography autobiography Autobiography . It was an account of a visit which I had paid to a fortune-teller in New Orleans, by request of an old Hannibal friend of ours, Mrs. Holliday, who was always consulting fortune-tellers fortune-tellers any fortune-tellers that came along and believing believing always believing everything they said. The day after my visit to Mr. Wilkerson we hunted up that old letter, to find out what my character had been forty-six years ago, and how long that New Orleans experimenter had condemned me to hold down this planet. I will append that letter here, and it will be seen that that woman, in that early day, had postponed my funeral until the completion of my eighty-sixth year,—so there is one thing that all the experts agree upon in my case: I am not to die young. Very well, let it go. I do not care anything more about it. The New Orleans lady did certainly paint my brother’s character with astonishing accuracy. She could not have done her work any better if she had had access to to to ‖ to the chapter which I dictated about Orion’s character a few months ago, and which was lately published in the North American Review. According to my letter, this lady began to read me at once, and very volubly—as if she had a great deal to say and not time enough at her disposal to say say say all of it in; according to my letter she was impatient of my interruptions. These things would indicate that she didn’t ask me any questions, but read me off-hand off-hand offhand out of her own head. I am obliged to accept accept take accept my own testimony, because I am not able at this distant day to refute it. I know that fortune-tellers who followed after her, in later years, did not read me off-hand off-hand offhand , but befooled me into talking, and that afterward, afterward, later, afterward, when I came to think their performances over, I was vexed with myself by discovering that they hadn’t furnished me any information at first hand, but had slyly pumped it out of me, in my innocence and credulity, and then had handed it back to me as being original discoveries of their own, and had astonished me with the wonderful results of their penetration. If my own testimony in the New Orleans lady’s case is true and trustworthy, she was surely a marvelous creature. She did not deal much in prophecy, and what she did furnish in that line was poor—so poor that I could have beaten it myself; myself; myself,; comma mended to a semicolon but she was undeniably and quite strikingly accurate when she was dealing with my history history history, and with my brother’s character. Her references to my sweetheart sweetheart sweet-heart , and her description of the sweetheart, and of how our estrangement was brought about, is so exactly in accordance with the facts, that I feel sure she pumped these things out of me without my being aware of it; anybody can be tempted to talk about his sweetheart, the only thing that is difficult is to get him to stop some time or other. The sweetheart was Laura Wright—the same who wrote me a letter last summer, from California, and from whom I had not heard for forty-seven years. I injected injected put injected her, her, her, and that incident, incident, incident, into this Autobiography at that time. I now offer for examination the letter which I wrote my brother Orion forty-six years ago. ago. ago. rule I have just received the following letter from Sam: Steamer “Alonzo Child.” Cairo, Ill., Feb. 6th, 1861 My Dear Brother: After promising Mrs. Holliday a dozen times (without anything further than a very remote intention of fulfilling the same)—to visit the fortune teller, Madame Caprell—I have at last done so. We lay in New Orleans a week, and towards the last, novelties began to grow alarmingly scarce; I did not know what to do next. Will Bowen had given the matter up, and gone to bed for the balance of the trip; the Captain was on the Sugar Levee, and the clerks were out on business. I was revolving in my mind another foray among the shipping in search of beautiful figure-heads or paragons of nautical architecture, when I happened to think of Mrs. Holliday; and as the Devil never comes unattended, I naturally thought of Madame Caprell immediately after, and then I started toward the St. Charles Hotel for the express purpose of picking up one of the enchantress’s bills, with a view to ascertaining her whereabouts. The bill said 37 Conti, above Tchoupitoulas—terms, $2 for gentlemen in my situation, i.e., unaccompanied by a lady. Arrived at the place, the bell was answered by a middle-aged lady (who certainly pitied me—I saw it in her eye), who kindly informed me that I was at the wrong door—turn to the left. Which I did. And stood in the Awful Presence. She’s a very pleasant little lady—rather pretty—about 28—say 5 feet 2¼—would weigh 116—has black eyes and hair—is polite and intelligent—uses good language, and talks much faster than I do. She invited me into the little back parlor, closed the door; and we were—alone. We sat down facing each other. Then she asked my age. And then she put her hand before her eyes a moment, and commenced talking as if she had a good deal to say say say, and not much time to say it in. Something after this style: Yours is a watery planet; you gain your livelihood on the water; but you should have been a lawyer—there is where your talents lie; you might have distinguished yourself as an orator; or as an editor; you have written a great deal; you write well—but you are rather out of practice; no matter—you will be in practice some day; you have a superb constitution; and as excellent health as any man in the world; you have great powers of endurance; in your profession, your strength holds out against the longest sieges without flagging; still, the upper part of your lungs—the top of them, is slightly affected—and you must take more care of yourself; you do not drink, but you use entirely too much tobacco; and you must stop it; mind, not moderate, but stop the use of it, totally; then I can almost promise you 86, when you will surely die; otherwise, look out for 28, 31, 34, 47 and 65; be careful—for you are not of a long-lived race, that is, on your father’s side; you are the only healthy member of your family, and the only one in it who has anything like the certainty of attaining to a great age—so, stop using tobacco, and be careful of yourself; in nearly all respects, you are the best sheep in your flock; your brother has an excellent mind, but it is not as well balanced as yours; I should call yours the best mind, altogether; there is more unswerving strength of will, and set purpose, and determination and energy in you, than in all the balance of your family put together; in some respects you take after your father, but you are much more like your mother, who belongs to the long-lived, energetic side of the house. S.L.C. But madam, you are too fast—you have given me too much of these qualities. Madame. No, I have not. Don’t interrupt me. I am telling the truth. And I’ll prove it. Thus: you never brought all your energies to bear upon an object, but what you accomplished it—for instance, you are self-made, self-educated. S.L.C. Which proves nothing. Madame. Don’t interrupt. When you sought your present occupation, you found a thousand obstacles in your way—obstacles which would have deterred nineteen out of any twenty men—obstacles unknown,—not even suspected by any save you and me, since you keep such matters to yourself,—but you fought your way through them, during a weary, weary length of time, and never flinched flinched flinched, or quailed, nor ever once wished to give over the battle—and hid the long struggle under a mask of cheerfulness, which saved your friends anxiety on your account. To do all this requires the qualities which I have named. S.L.C. You flatter well, madam. Madame. Don’t Don’t Don’t ‘Don’t’ underscored interrupt! interrupt! interrupt.! period mended to an exclamation point Up to within a short time, you had always lived from hand to mouth—now you are in easy circumstances—for which you need give credit to no one but yourself. The turning point in your life occurred in 1847–8. 1847–8. 184-7--8. S.L.C. Which was?— was?— was?— Madame.—a death, perhaps; and this threw you upon the world and made you what you are; it was always intended that you should make yourself; therefore, it was well that this calamity occurred as early as it did. You will never die of water, although your career upon it in the future seems well sprinkled with misfortune; but I entreat you to remember this: no matter what your circumstances are, in September of the year in which you are 28, don’t go near the water—I will not tell you why, but by all that is true and good, I charge you, while that month lasts, keep away from the water— (Which she repeated several times, with much show of earnestness—“make “make ‘“make single quotation mark mended to double ‘make a note on’t,” and let’s see how how now much the woman knows.) knows.) knows). [The [The [The italics are Sam’s, as he made them 20 years ago. O.C.] O.C.] O.C.] Madame. Your life will be menaced in the years I have before mentioned before mentioned before-mentioned —will be in imminent peril when you are 31: 31: 31—: if you escape, then when you are 34—neither 47 nor 65 looks so badly; you will continue upon the water for some time yet; you will not retire finally until ten years from now; two years from now, or a little more, a child will be born to you! S.L.C. Permit me to hope, madam, in view of this prospective good luck, that I may also have the good-fortune to be married before that time. Madame. Well, you are a free-spoken young man. You will be married within two years. You will be married within two years. Madam: You will be married within two years inserted in the top margin not in Of course you will. (Make another note, Orion—I think I’ve caught her up a played-out chute on a falling river this time—but who knows?) Madame. And mind—your whole future welfare depends upon your getting married as soon as you can; don’t smile—don’t laugh—for it is just as true as truth itself; if you fail to marry within two years from now, you will regret that you paid so little attention to what I am saying; don’t be foolish, but go and marry—your future depends upon it; you can get the girl you have in your eye, if you are a better man than her mother—she she she ‘she’ underscored (the girl) is; the old gentleman is not in the way, but the mother is decidedly cranky, and much in the way; she caused the trouble and produced the coolness which has existed between yourself and the young lady for so many months past—and you ought to break through this ice; you you you ‘you’ underscored won’t commence, and the girl won’t—you are both entirely too proud—a well-matched pair, truly; the young lady is— S.L.C. But I didn’t ask after the young lady, madam madam Madam , and I don’t want to hear about her. Madame. There, just as I said—she would have spoken to me just as you have done. For shame! I must go on. She is 17—not remarkably pretty, but very intelligent—is educated, and accomplished—and has property—5 feet 3 inches—is slender—dark brown hair and eyes—you don’t want to see her? Oh, no—but you will, nevertheless, before this year is out—here in New Orleans (mark that), too—and then—look out! The fact of her being so far away now—which is the case, is it not?—doesn’t affect the matter. You will marry twice—your first wife will live—(I have forgotten the number of years. S.L.C.)—Your second choice will be a widow—your family, finally, all told, will number ten children— S.L.C. Slow!—madam, slow!—and stand by to ship up!—for I know you are out of the channel. Madame. Some of them will live and some will not— S.L.C. There’s consolation in the latter, at least. Madame. Yes, ten is the number. S.L.C. You must think I am fond of children. Madame. And you are, although you pretend the contrary—which is an ugly habit; quit it; I grant you that you do not like to handle them, though. What is your brother’s age? 33,—and a lawyer?—and in pursuit of an office? Well, he stands a better chance than the other two, and, he may get it—he must do his best—and not trust too much to others, either—which is the very reason why he is so far behind, now; he never does do anything if he can get anybody else to do it for him; which is bad; he never goes steadily on till he attains an object, but nearly always drops it when the battle is half won; he is too visionary—is always flying off on a new hobby; this will never do—tell him I said so. He is a good lawyer—a very good lawyer—and a fine speaker—is very popular, and much respected, and makes many friends; but although he retains their friendship, he loses their confidence, by displaying his instability of character; he wants to speculate in lands, and will, some day, with very good success; the land he has now will be very valuable after a while— S.L.C. Say 250 years hence, or thereabouts, madam— Madame.—No—less time—but never mind the land, that is a secondary consideration—let him drop that for the present, and devote himself to his business and politics, with all his might, for he must hold offices under Government, and 6 or 8 years from this time, he will run for Congress. You will marry, and will finally live in the South—do not live in the North-West; you will not succeed well; you will live in the South, and after a while you will possess a good deal of property—retire at the end of ten years—after which your pursuits will be literary—try the law—you will certainly succeed. I am done, now. If you have any questions to ask, ask, ask—, ask them freely, freely, freely—, and if it be in my power power power, I will answer without reserve—without reserve. I asked a few questions of minor importance—paid her $2 and left—under the decided impression that going to the fortune-teller’s was just as good as going to the opera, and cost scarcely a trifle more—ergo, I will disguise myself and go again, one of these days, when other amusements fail. Now isn’t she the devil? That is to say, isn’t she a right smart little woman? I have given you almost her very language to me, and nothing have I have I have I extenuated, nor set down aught in malice. Whenever she said anything pointed about you, she would ask me to tell you of it, so that you might profit by it—and confound me if I don’t think she read you a good deal better than she did me. That Congress business amused me a little, for she wasn’t far wide of the mark you set yourself, as to time. And father’s death in ’47–8, and the turning-point in my life, were very good. I wonder if there is a past and future chronological table of events in a man’s life written in his forehead for the special convenience of these clairvoyants? She said father’s side of the house was not long-lived, but that he doctored himself to death. I do not know about that, though. She said that up to 7 years, I had no health, and then mentioned several dates after that when my health had been very bad. But that about that girl’s mother being “cranky,” and playing the devil with me, was about the neatest thing she performed—for although I have never spoken of the matter, I happen to know that she spoke truth. The young lady has been beaten by the old one, though—through the romantic agency of intercepted letters, and the girl still thinks I was in fault—and always will, I reckon, for I don’t see how she’ll ever find out the contrary. And the And the textual note: In the margin of TS1 ribbon, from these words through the end of the paragraph, SLC wrote a bracket, an ‘x’, and ‘last summer’. woman had the impudence to say that although I was eternally falling in love, still, when I went to bed at night, I somehow always happened to think of Miss Laura before I thought of my last new flame—and it always would be the case [which [which [which will be very comfortable, won’t it, when both she and I (like one of Dickens’ characters) are Another’s?] Another’s?] Anothers?] But hang the woman, she did tell the truth, and I won’t deny it. But she said I would speak to Miss Laura first—but I’ll stake my last button on it she missed it there. So much for Madame Caprell. Although of course, I have no faith in her pretended powers, I listened to her for half an hour hour hour, with the greatest interest, and I am willing to acknowledge that she said some very startling things, and made some wonderful guesses. Upon leaving she said I must take care of myself; that it had cost me several years to build up my constitution to its present state of perfection, and now I must watch it. And she would give me this motto: “L’ouvrage de l’année année anneée Hobby added the accent on TS1 ribbon, and SLC retraced it on TS1 carbon est détruit détruit deétruit Hobby added the accent on TS1 ribbon, and SLC retraced it on TS1 carbon dans un jour,”—which means, if you don’t know it, “The work of a year is destroyed in a day.” We shall not go to St. Louis. We turn back from here, to-morrow or next day. When you want money, let mother know, and she will send it. She and Pamela are always fussing about small change, so I sent them a hundred and twenty quarters yesterday—fiddler’s change enough to last till I get back, I reckon. Sam. Comments—by Orion. 1. The italics are as Sam made them 20 years ago. 2. Sam smoked too much for many years, and still smokes. 3. My mother’s mother died when my mother was 13 years of age. Her father died at the age of 63. Her grandfather on her father’s side lived beyond 60, and his widow beyond 80. On my father’s side his father was killed accidentally when my father was 7 years old. My father’s mother lived beyond 60. My father died at 48. My mother is now (1880) 78. My father may have hastened the ending of his life by the use of too much medicine. He doctored himself from my earliest remembrance. During the latter part of his life he bought Cook’s pills by the box and took one or more daily. In taking a pill he held it between his right thumb and forefinger, turned his head back, cast the pill to the root of his tongue, and from a glass of water in his left hand, took a sup and washed down the bitter dose. 4. Sam was delicate when a child. 5. My father died March 24, 1847, Sam being then 11 years of age. My mother soon took him from school, and set him to learning the printing business. 6. I have carefully compared this copy with the original, to be certain that it is word for word the same.