28 August 1907 Dictated August August Aug. 28, 1907 More remarks about Whitelaw Reid, and about Edward House: his bringing the injunction against the “Prince and Pauper” play, etc. As a pendant to my closing remark of yesterday I wish to insert here, from this morning’s paper, the following striking and photographically exact portrait of the President: MR. MR. IS THIS MR. MR. ROOSEVELT’S EXACT PORTRAIT. PORTRAIT. PORTRAIT? PORTRAIT. (Samuel W. McCall, Republican Congressman from Massachusetts.) You are liable some day to have a President supremely lacking in the qualities of a statesman, statesman, statesman statesman, and one who is egotistic, impulsive, of immature judgment, a mere glutton of the limelight, ready to barter away prosperity and even his country’s freedom for momentary popular applause. If he is an autocrat, such as he, he, he is such he, is such for the time, time, time time, will your country be. Instead of a mighty nation, great in her physical strength and greater in her moral qualities, you may have a strutting, confiscating, shrieking, meddling America. In the early days Whitelaw Reid and I were friends, but in 1872 a coldness occurred. Reid and Edward H. House had a falling out. House told me his side of the matter, and at second-hand I got Reid’s side of it—which was simply that he considered House a “blatherskite,” “blatherskite,” “blatherskite,” and wouldn’t have anything to do with him. I ranged myself on House’s side, and relations between Reid and me ceased; they were not resumed for twenty-two years; and then not cordially, but merely diplomatically, so to speak; we have met at people’s tables, and smiled and passed the time of day, but neither of us has much much much enjoyed even those slight love passages. I have never invited him, and he has never invited me, until he gave me that dinner at Dorchester House the other day. He did it because he couldn’t help it, and he knew I accepted it because I couldn’t help it. I was visiting England in the character of an unofficial ambassador, to receive and acknowledge an honor ostensibly conferred upon me, but really—at least mainly— —at least mainly— —at least mainly— upon the United States, and he, as the official representative of the nation, was obliged to take public notice of me. He wouldn’t have invited me me me ‘me’ underscored , but he had had had ‘had’ underscored to invite the United States. I left a card on Lord Curzon as soon as I reached London, and went straight from there, in due and righteous accordance with ambassadorial etiquette and usage, there, . . . usage, there, . . . usage, to Dorchester House. Reid was diplomatically pleasant and friendly; I also was diplomatically pleasant pleasant pleasand and friendly, and it is quite likely that we shall remain in that condition until Satan wants one of us and the New Jerusalem the other; the final result is not in our hands, but each of us thinks he knows how it will be. In justice to Reid I confess that many and many a year ago I found out that he was right concerning Edward H. House. Reid had labeled him correctly; he was a blatherskite. He was a tall and handsome creature, something over thirty years of age, and had a mobile, animated, and brightly intellectual face, face, face, and most charming and engaging manners. He went out to Japan in 1873, (his second trip thither, I think,) (his second trip thither, I think,) (his second trip thither, I think,) and he called upon me in London on his way. I had been helping the London newspaper men fetch the Shah of Persia over from Ostend, I being for forty-eight hours in the service of Dr. Hosmer, London representative of the New York Herald. I had dictated an account of the excursion covering two or three columns of the Herald, and had charged and received three hundred dollars and expenses for it—a narrative which seemed to the Herald to lack humor, a defect which the New York office supplied from its own resources, which were poor and coarse and silly beyond imagination. House was present when Hosmer came to me with the money, and he lightly borrowed it of me and changed the subject. A year or two afterward he wrote me from Japan that his New York banker had failed, at cost to him of twenty-five thousand dollars, all the money he had in the world, and he hoped I had been wise enough to cash the draft for three hundred dollars previously sent to me by him, me by him, me, by him, while it still possessed value. This was the first time I had heard of the draft, and with this mention of it the incident closed. But not the intimacy. I did not doubt that House had sent the draft, and that with my customary carelessness I had mislaid it and forgotten all about it. About 1882, or along there somewhere, House came back from Japan desperately knotted up and disabled by rheumatism. He brought with him a bright and good-natured and wonderfully muscular Japanese lad who wheeled him about in a Bath chair, and who carried him in his arms from bed to chair and from chair to bed, weighty as he was, and did it with unfailing patience and serenity, although House gave him a vigorous cursing every time he got a jolt that gave him pain. I visited him in New York. I knew—at least by his his his ‘his’ underscored testimony—that his alleged twenty-five thousand dollars had come from dramatic assistance rendered by him to Dion Boucicault. He said that he had done more than half of the literary work on “Arrah-na-Pogue,” and that he had received the twenty-five thousand dollars as his share of the royalties. I believed the statement, and even went on believing it even went on believing it continued to believe it even went on believing it when a year later Boucicault laughed at it and said it was a straight lie, with not a vestige of truth in it. However, when I visited House in New York I was looking for a dramatist for “The Prince and the Pauper,” and this principal author of Boucicault’s great play seemed to me to be the very man I wanted; so I proposed that House dramatize the book. He was indifferent, and declined. I hunted up another dramatist—Mrs. Abby Sage Richardson—and gave her the contract on a royalty. She hadn’t ever dramatized anything, but knew she could; therefore she was satisfactory to me. She made a dramatization, and a marvel it was. She was sober enough, but her play was drunk—quite the drunkest play of the century, and quite the most impossible of representation, outside the madhouse, but Daniel Daniel Daniel Frohman’s stage-manager took it in hand and reformed it, and little Elsie Leslie played it to the public satisfaction. Meantime, House had come to Hartford, bringing his Bath chair, his muscular little slave, and a young Japanese girl, Koto, whom he called his adopted daughter. I had invited them, and they were our guests during two or three months; then they returned to New York. After the play was put on the boards, House notified me, through his lawyer, Robert G. Ingersoll, to take it off or he would bring an injunction suit. He claimed that although there were no writings supporting the claim, I had asked him to dramatize the book and he had agreed to do it, and had now begun his task. He soon quarreled with Ingersoll, discharged him, and hired Howe and Hummel Hummel Hummell in his place. Birds of a feather, etc.; Hummel is in the penitentiary, now. Birds . . . now. Birds . . . now. Hummel Hummel Hummell renewed the notice to me; I declined to consider it; then he brought the suit. The case came before Judge Daly in chambers. I testified by deposition; so did House and Koto. House and Koto swore that when I talked with House in New York about the play, House had eagerly accepted my proposition; proposition; proposition,; comma mended to a semicolon that a detailed contract was arranged, and that its terms were so definite and so perfectly understood by both parties that we agreed agreed mutually agreed that to reduce it to writing was quite unnecessary. House and Koto also swore that House and I frequently took counsel together concerning the play while they were my guests in Hartford. To be brief, and also exact, the pair swore to not a thing that was not a lie. Judge Daly’s decision went against me, upon one ground and upon one ground only—to wit, that that that the testimony upon the two sides utterly disagreeing, the veracity of a sick man, confined to his chamber, was more to be depended upon than the oath of a man who was well, and at large. It sounds odd, but I have truly stated Judge Daly’s reason for deciding the case in House’s favor. A temporary injunction was put upon the box-office, and the play permitted to go permitted to go went permitted to go on with its successful career, the royalties to be paid into the court and remain there, undisturbed, until House’s suit for a permanent injunction should be decided one way or the other. decided one way or the other. decided. one way or the other. Then House and his little family removed to Hartford and established themselves in the Isabella Beecher Hooker cottage in our neighborhood. House thought he would like to have two “Prince and Pauper” plays going, so he wrote one and put it in the hands of the parents of little Tommy Russell, a juvenile actor of good and growing reputation, House making himself responsible for the expense of staging it. It was to open in Brooklyn, and the date was advertised. On that day George Warner, brother of Charles D., came to our house with news: he had heard Charles Gross, lawyer, say that he had extradition papers and was going to descend upon House and ship him to France to answer a charge of swindling the Crédit Crédit Crédit accent added Lyonnais out of a considerable sum by false pretenses. That night House and his tribe glided out of Hartford at a late hour, and when next they were heard of they were in Japan. The The It was just time for tThe new play opened opened to opened in Brooklyn, Brooklyn, Brooklyn., It opened, and was a complete and perfect and irremediable failure; there was no second night; notice was sent to Hartford, with the request that House come forward and pay the bills, which were formidable—but he he House he had already skipped, and was safe. The temporary injunction on Mrs. Richardson’s play was at once removed, and I was told that she went promptly forward and got her royalties out of the court’s hands. I instructed Mr. Bainbridge Colby to go and get my share. At the end of two years I asked him about it and found that he had forgotten to attend to it. I then placed the matter in the hands of Whitford, that incomparable ass, and when I asked him about it, two or three years afterward, I found that he also had forgotten it; time went on, and I presently forgot all about it myself; I have never collected those royalties, and I do not now know what became of them. I was wrong; Whitelaw Reid was right; House was a blatherskite.