12 February 1906 Monday, February title February Feb. 12, 1906 Susy’s Susy’s Susiey’s Susy’s Biography Biography biography continued—Some of the tricks played in “Tom Sawyer” Sawyer” Sawyer. Sawyer.” — The broken sugar-bowl—Skating on the Mississippi with Tom Nash, etc. Tom Nash, etc. Tom Nash, etc. (Here insert the Phelps incident, Berlin, 1891–2.) etc. Tom Nash, etc. (Here insert the Phelps incident, Berlin, 1891–2.) not in From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. Now we will return to From Susie y’s biography: ‘Susiey’s biography:’ underscored From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. Clara Clara “Clara “Clara Clara and I are sure that papa played the trick on Grandma, about the whipping, that is related in “The “The ‘The ‘“The single quotation mark mended to double “The Adventures of Tom Sayer:” Sayer:” Sayer:’ Sayer:’” single quotation mark mended to double Sayer”; “Hand “Hand ‘Hand ‘“Hand single quotation mark mended to double “Hand me that switch.” switch.” switch.’ switch.’” single quotation mark mended to double switch.” The switch hovered in the air, the peril was desperate—“My “My ‘My ‘“My single quotation mark mended to double “My , look behind you Aunt!” Aunt!” Aunt!’ Aunt!’” single quotation mark mended to double Aunt!” The old lady whirled around and snatched her skirts out of danger. The lad fled on the instant, scrambling up the high board fence and dissapeared over it. it. it.” it.” it. Susy and Clara were quite right about that. Susy . . . that. Susiey . . . that. Susy . . . that. Then Susy Susy Susiey Susy says: And And “And “And And we know papa played “Hookey” “Hookey” ‘Hookey’ ‘“Hookey’” single quotation marks mended to double “Hookey” all the time. And how readily would papa pretend pretend pretended pretend to be dying so as not to have to go to school! school! school!” school!” school! These revelations and exposures are searching, but they are just. If I am as transparent to other people as I was to Susy Susy Susiey Susy , I have wasted much effort in this life. Grandma Grandma “Grandma “Grandma Grandma couldn’t make papa go to school, so she let him go into a printing-office to learn the trade. He did so, and gradually picked up enough education to enable him to do about as well as those who were more studious in early life. life. life.” life.” life. It is noticeable that Susy Susy Susiey Susy does not get overheated when she is complimenting me, but maintains a proper judicial and biographical calm. It is noticeable, noticeable, noticeable noticeable, also, and it is to her credit as a biographer, that she distributes compliment and criticism with a fair and even hand. My mother had a good deal of trouble with me, but I think she enjoyed it. She had none at all with my brother Henry, who was two years younger than I, and I think that the unbroken monotony of his goodness and truthfulness and obedience would have been a burden to her but for the relief and variety which I furnished in the other direction. I was a tonic. I was valuable to her. I never thought of it before, but now I see it. I never knew Henry to do a vicious thing toward me, or toward any one else—but he frequently did righteous ones ones things ones ones that cost me as heavily. It was his duty to report me, when I needed reporting and neglected to do it myself, and he was very faithful in discharging that duty. He is “Sid” in “Tom Sawyer.” But Sid was not Henry. Henry was a very much finer and better boy than ever Sid was. It was Henry who called my mother’s attention to the fact that the thread with which she had sewed my collar together to keep me from going in swimming, had changed color. My mother would not have discovered it but for that, and she was manifestly piqued when she recognized that that prominent bit of circumstantial evidence had escaped her sharp eye. That detail probably added a detail to my punishment. It is human. We generally visit our shortcomings on somebody else when there is a possible excuse for it—but no matter, matter, matter. matter., matter, I took it out of Henry. There is always compensation for such as are unjustly used. I often took it out of him—sometimes as an advance payment for something which I hadn’t yet done. These were occasions when the opportunity was too too too too strong a temptation, and I had to draw on the future. I did not need to copy this idea from my mother, and probably didn’t. It is most likely that I invented it for myself. Still she wrought upon that principle upon occasion. If the incident of the broken sugar-bowl is in “Tom Sawyer”—I don’t remember whether it is or not—that is an example of it. Henry never stole sugar. He took it openly from the bowl. His mother knew he wouldn’t take sugar when she wasn’t looking, but she had her doubts about me. Not exactly doubts, either. She knew very well I would. One day when she was not present, Henry took sugar from her prized and precious old-English old-English old-English old-English old English sugar-bowl, which was an heirloom in the family—and he managed to break the bowl. It was the first time I had ever had a chance to tell anything on him, and I was inexpressibly glad. I told him I was going to tell on him, but he was not disturbed. When my mother came in and saw the bowl lying on the floor in fragments, she was speechless for a minute. I allowed that silence to work; I judged it would increase the effect. I was waiting for her to ask “Who did that?”—so that I could fetch out my news. But it was an error of calculation. When she got through with her silence she didn’t ask anything about it—she merely gave me a crack on the skull with her thimble that I felt all the way down to my heels. Then I broke out with my injured innocence, expecting to make her very sorry that she had punished the wrong one. I expected her to do something remorseful and pathetic. I told her that I was not the one—it was Henry. But there was no upheaval. She said, without emotion, emotion, emotion emotion, emotion, “It’s all right. It isn’t any matter. You deserve it for something you’ve done that I didn’t know about; and if you haven’t done it, why then you deserve it for something that you are going to do, that I shan’t shan’t sha’n’t hear about.” There was a stairway outside the house, which led up to the rear part of the second story. One day Henry was sent on an errand, and he took a tin bucket along. errand, and . . . along. errand., and . . . along. errand, . . . along. I knew he would have to ascend those stairs, so I went up and locked the door on the inside, and came down into the garden, which had been newly plowed plowed plowed ploughed and was rich in choice firm clods of black mould mould mold . I gathered a generous equipment of these, and ambushed him. I waited till he had climbed the stairs and was near the landing and couldn’t escape. Then I bombarded him with clods, which he warded off with his tin bucket the best he could, but without much success, for I was a good marksman. The clods smashing against the weatherboarding weatherboarding weatherboarding marked as one word weatherboarding weather-boarding weather-boarding fetched my mother out to see what was the matter, and I tried to explain that I was amusing Henry. Both of them were after me in a minute, but I knew the way over that high board fence and escaped for that time. After an hour or two, when I ventured back, there was no one around and I thought the incident was closed. But it was not. not. not so. not. so. not. Henry was ambushing me. With an unusually competent aim for him, he landed a stone on the side of my head head head, head which raised a bump there which which which which that that felt like the Matterhorn. I carried it to my mother straightway for sympathy, but she was not strongly moved. It seemed to be her idea that incidents like this would eventually reform me if I harvested enough of them. So the matter was only educational. I had had a sterner view of it than that, that, that that, that, before. It was not right to give the cat the Pain-Killer; Pain-Killer; “Pain-Killer;” “Pain-Killer”; I realize it now. I would not repeat it in these days. But in those “Tom Sawyer” days it was a great and sincere satisfaction to me to see Peter perform under its influence—and if actions do speak as loud as words, he took as much interest in it as I did. It was a most detestable medicine, Perry Davis’s Pain-Killer. Mr. Pavey’s negro man, who was a person of good judgment and considerable curiosity, wanted to sample it, and I let him. It was his opinion that it was made of hellfire. hellfire. hell-fire. hell-fire. hell-fire. Those were the cholera days of ’49. The people along the Mississippi were paralysed paralysed paralyzed with fright. Those who could run away, did it. And many died of fright in the flight. Fright killed three persons where the cholera killed one. Those who couldn’t flee kept themselves drenched with cholera preventives preventives preventives preventatives , and my mother chose Perry Davis’s Pain-Killer for me. She was not distressed about herself. She avoided that kind of preventive preventive preventive preventative . But she made me promise to take a teaspoonful of Pain-Killer every day. Originally it was my intention to keep the promise, but at that time I didn’t know as much about Pain-Killer as I knew after my first experiment with it. She didn’t watch Henry’s bottle—she could trust Henry. But she marked my bottle with a pencil, on the label, every day, and examined it to see if the teaspoonful had been removed. The floor was not carpeted. It had cracks in it, and I fed the Pain-Killer to the cracks with very good results—no cholera occurred results—no cholera occurred results—there was no cholera results— there was no cholera occurred results—no cholera occurred down below. It was upon one of these occasions that that friendly cat came waving his tail and supplicating for Pain-Killer—which he got—and then went into those hysterics which ended with his colliding with all the furniture in the room and finally going out of the open window and carrying the flower-pots with him, just in time for my mother to arrive and look over her glasses in petrified astonishment and say say say say, say, “What in the world is the matter with Peter?” I don’t remember what my explanation was, but if it is recorded in that book it may not be may not be is doubtless is doubtless may not be may not be the right one. Whenever my conduct was of such exaggerated impropriety that my mother’s extemporary punishments were inadequate, she saved the matter up for Sunday, and made me go to church Sunday night—which was a penalty sometimes bearable, perhaps, but as a rule it was not, and I avoided it for the sake of my constitution. She would never believe that I had been to church until she had applied her test: she test: she test. She test: Sshe test: she made me tell her what the text was. That was a simple matter, and matter, and matter— matter—, and matter, and caused me no trouble. I didn’t have to go to church to get a text. I selected one for myself. This worked very well until one time when one time when one time when one time when my text and the one furnished by a neighbor, who had been to church, didn’t tally. After that my mother took other methods. I don’t know what they were now. In those days men and boys wore rather long cloaks in the winter-time. They were black, and were lined with very bright and showy Scotch plaids. One winter’s night when I was starting to church to square a crime of some kind committed during the week, I hid my cloak near the gate and went off and played with the other boys until church was over. Then I returned home. But in the dark I put the cloak on wrong-side wrong-side wrong-side wrong side out, entered the room, threw the cloak aside, and then stood the usual examination. I got along very well until the temperature of the church was mentioned. My mother said, “It said, ¶ “It said no ¶ “It said, ¶ “It SLC inserted the paragraph sign, and Munro added the comma said, ¶ “It must have been impossible to keep warm there on such a night.” I didn’t see the art of that remark, and was foolish enough to explain that I wore my cloak all the time that I was in church. She asked if I kept it on from church home, too. I didn’t see the bearing of that remark. I said that that was what I had done. She said, “You said, ¶ “You said no ¶ “You said, ¶ “You SLC inserted the paragraph sign, and Munro added the comma said, ¶ “You wore it in church in church not in in church in church with that red Scotch plaid outside and glaring? Didn’t that attract any attention?” Of course to continue such a dialogue would have been tedious and unprofitable, and I let it go, and took the consequences. That was about 1849. 1849 1849 (1849) typed in the margin, deleted by Harvey not in 1849. inserted and boxed in the margin Tom Nash was a boy of my own age—the postmaster’s postmaster’s post-master’s postmaster’s son. The Mississippi was frozen across, and he and I went skating one night, probably without permission. I cannot see why we should go skating in the night unless without permission, for there could be no considerable amusement to be gotten out of skating at night night midnight midnight night if nobody nobody nobody anynobody was going to object to it. About midnight, when we were more than half a mile half a mile half-a-mile half a mile out toward the Illinois shore, we heard some ominous rumbling and grinding and crashing going on between us and the home side of the river, and we knew what it meant—the ice ice river river ice ice was breaking up. We started for home, pretty badly scared. We flew along at full speed whenever the moonlight sifting down between the clouds enabled us us ups us to tell which was ice and which was water. In the pauses we waited; started again whenever there was a good bridge of ice; paused again when we came to naked water and waited in distress until a floating vast cake should bridge that place. It took us an hour to make the trip—a trip which we made in a misery of apprehension all the time. But at last we arrived within a very brief distance of the shore. shore. shore. shore. We waited again; there again; there again. There again;. Tthere period mended to a semicolon again; there was another place that needed bridging. All about us the ice was plunging and grinding along and piling itself up in mountains on the shore, and the dangers were increasing, not diminishing. We grew very impatient to get to solid ground, so we started too early and went springing from cake to cake. Tom made a miscalculation, and fell short. He got a bitter bath, but he was so close to shore that he only had to swim a stroke or two—then his feet struck hard bottom and he crawled out. I arrived a little later, without accident. We had been in a drenching perspiration, and Tom’s bath was a disaster for him. He took to his bed sick, and had had had hasd a procession of diseases. diseases. diseases. diseases. The closing one was scarlet fever scarlet fever scarlet fever scarlet-fever , and he came out of it stone deaf. Within a year or two speech departed, of course. But some years later he was taught to talk, talk, talk, talk, after a fashion—one couldn’t always make out what it was he was trying to say. Of course he could not modulate his voice, since he couldn’t hear himself talk. When he supposed he was talking low low low, low, low and confidentially, you could hear him in Illinois. Four years ago (1902) 1902 1902 (1902) typed in the margin, deleted by Harvey 1902- typed in the margin not in I was invited by the University of Missouri to come out there and receive the honorary degree of LL.D. I took that opportunity to spend a week in Hannibal—a city now, a village in my day. It had been fifty-three fifty-three fifty-two five fifty-five fifty-fivethree fifty-three years since Tom Nash and I had had that adventure. When I was at the railway station ready to leave Hannibal, there was a crowd crowd great crowd great crowd crowd of citizens there. I saw Tom Nash approaching me across a vacant space, and I walked toward him, for I recognized him at once. He was old and white-headed, white-headed, grizzled, white-headed, white-headed, but the boy of fifteen was still visible in him. He came up to me, made a trumpet of his hands at my ear, nodded his head toward the citizens and said confidentially—in a yell like a fog-horn— fog-horn— fog-horn fog-horn— fog-horn— “Same ¶ “Same no ¶ “Same ¶ “Same damned fools, Sam! Sam! Sam. Sam.! period mended to an exclamation point Sam! ” From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. To return to the biography: From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. From Susy’s Biography. ‘From Susy’s Biography.’ underscored From Susy’s Biography. Papa Papa “Papa “Papa Papa was about twenty years old when he went on the Mississippi as a pilot. Just before he started on his tripp Grandma Clemens asked him to promise her on the Bible not to touch intoxicating liquors or swear, and he said “Yes “Yes ‘Yes ‘“Yes single quotation mark mended to double “Yes , mother, I will,” will,” will,’ will,’” single quotation mark mended to double will,” and he kept that promise seven years when Grandma released him from it. it. it.” it.” it. Under the inspiring influence of that remark, what a garden of forgotten reforms rises upon my sight! sight! sight. sight.! sight!