12 January 1906 January 12, 1906 January 12, 1906 Jan. 12, 1906. Jan. 12, 1905. Auto. Part the erroneous year was corrected in pencil, probably post-1906 Autobiography. Part Dictated Jan. 12, 1905. ¶ Dictated January 12th, 1905. followed immediately by the NAR text beginning ‘. . . But’; see the entry for ‘I am’ at 268.32 This talk about Mr. Whittier’s seventieth birthday reminds me that my own seventieth arrived recently—that is to say, it arrived on the 30th of November, but Colonel Colonel Col. Harvey was not able to celebrate it on that date because that date had been preempted by the President to be used as as as the usual and perfunctory as the usual and perfunctory Thanksgiving Day, a function which originated in New England two or three centuries ago when those people recognized that they really had something to be thankful for—annually, not oftener—if they had succeeded in exterminating their neighbors, the Indians, during the previous twelve months instead of getting exterminated by their neighbors the Indians. Thanksgiving Day became a habit, for the reason that in the course of time, as the years drifted on, it was perceived that the exterminating had ceased to be mutual and was all on the white man’s side, consequently on the Lord’s side, consequently it was proper to thank the Lord for it and extend the usual annual compliments. The original reason for a Thanksgiving Day has long ago ceased to exist—the Indians have long ago been comprehensively and satisfactorily exterminated and the account closed with Heaven, Heaven, the Lord, the Lord, Heaven, with the thanks due. But, from old habit, Thanksgiving Day has remained with us, and every year the President of the United States and the Governors of all the several States States states and the territories set themselves the task, every November, to advertise for advertise for hunt up hunt up advertise for something to be thankful for, and then they put those thanks into a few crisp and reverent phrases, in the form of a Proclamation, and this is read from all the pulpits in the land, the national conscience is wiped clean with one swipe, and sin is resumed is resumed begins is resumed is resumed at the old stand. The President and the Governors had to have my birthday—the 30th—for Thanksgiving Day, and this was a great inconvenience to Colonel Colonel Col. Harvey, who had made much preparation for a banquet to be given to me on that day in celebration of the fact that it marked my seventieth escape from the gallows, according to his idea—a fact which he regarded with favor and contemplated with pleasure, because he is my publisher and commercially interested. He went to Washington to try to get the President to select another day for the national Thanksgiving, and I furnished him with arguments to use which I thought persuasive and convincing, arguments which ought to persuade him even to put off Thanksgiving Day a whole year—on the ground that nothing had happened during the previous twelvemonth twelvemonth twelve-month except several vicious and inexcusable wars, and King Leopold of Belgium’s usual annual slaughters and robberies in the Congo State, together with the Insurance revelations in New York, which seemed to establish the fact that if there was an honest man left in the United States, there was only one, and we wanted to celebrate his seventieth birthday. But the Colonel came back unsuccessful, and put my birthday celebration off to the 5th of December. December. December. indented: (Here paste in the proceedings of the Birthday Banquet). I had twice as good a time at this seventieth, as I had had at Mr. Whittier’s seventieth, twenty-eight years earlier. In the speech which I made were concealed many facts. I expected everybody to discount those facts 95 per cent per cent per cent. and that is probably what happened. That does not trouble me, I am I am I am ¶ . . . . But I am . . . But I am text begins after the dateline with no new paragraph: see the entry for the title used to having my statements discounted. My mother had begun had begun had begun had begun began began it before I was seven years old. Yet Yet But, But, Yet Yet all through my life life life, life, life my facts have had a substratum of truth, and therefore they were not without preciousness. preciousness. value. value. preciousness. preciousness. Any person who is familiar with me knows how to strike my average, and therefore knows how to get at the jewel of any fact of mine and dig it out of its blue-clay matrix. My mother knew that art. When I was seven or eight, or ten, or twelve years old—along there—a neighbor said to her, her, my mother her, her, “Do no ¶ “Do no ¶ “Do ¶ “Do ¶ “Do you ever believe anything that that boy says?” My no ¶ My no ¶ My ¶ My ¶ My mother said said said said, said, “He no ¶ “He no ¶ “He ¶“He ¶ “He is the wellspring wellspring wellspring well-spring of truth, but you can’t bring up the whole well with one bucket”—and she added, added, added, added, “I know his average, therefore he never deceives me. I discount him 30 30 90 90 30 thirty SLC altered ‘90’ to ‘30’ and Munro revised it to ‘thirty’ thirty per cent per cent per cent. for embroidery, and what is left is perfect and priceless truth, without a flaw in it anywhere.” Now to make a jump of forty years, without breaking the connection: that word “embroidery” connection: that word “embroidery” connection, one of those words connection, one of those words: that word “embroidery” connection: that word “embroidery” was used again in my presence and concerning me, when I was fifty years old, one night at Reverend Reverend Rev. the Rev. Frank Goodwin’s house in Hartford, at a meeting of the Monday Evening Club. The Monday Evening Club still exists. It was founded about forty-five years ago by that theological giant, Rev. Dr. Bushnell, Bushnell, Bushnell, Bushnell, and some comrades of his, men of large large large large intellectual calibre and more or less distinction, local or national. I was admitted to membership in it in the fall of 1871 and was an active member thenceforth until I left Hartford in the summer of 1891. The membership was restricted, in those days, to eighteen—possibly twenty. The meetings began about the 1st of October and were held in the private houses of the members every fortnight thereafter throughout the cold months until the 1st of May. Usually there were a dozen members present—sometimes as many as fifteen. There was an essay and a discussion. The essayists followed each other in alphabetical order through the season. The essayist could choose his own subject and talk twenty minutes on it, from manuscript manuscript MS. or orally, according to his preference. Then the discussion followed, and each member present was allowed ten minutes in which to express his views. The wives of these people were always present. It was their privilege. It was also their privilege to keep still; they still; they still. They still. T; they still; they were not allowed to throw any light upon the discussion. After the discussion there was a supper, and talk, and cigars. This supper began at ten o’clock promptly, and the company broke up and went away at midnight. At least they did except upon one occasion. In my recent recent not in recent recent Birthday speech I remarked remarked have remarked have remarked remarked upon the fact that I have always bought cheap cigars, and that is true. I have never bought bought smoked bought costly ones, and whenever I go to a rich man’s house to dinner I conceal cheap cigars about my person, as a protection against his costly ones. There are enough costly Havana Havana Havana Hanava cigars in my my this my my house to start a considerable cigar shop with, but I did not buy one of them—I doubt if I have ever smoked one of them. They are Christmas presents from wealthy and ignorant ignorant ignorant ignorant bracketed and ‘uninformed’ interlined above uninformed friends, extending back for a long series of years. Among the lot, lot, lot, lot, I found, the other day, a double-handful of J. Pierpont Pierpont Pierrepont Morgan’s cigars, which were given to me three years ago by his particular friend, the late William E. Dodge, one night when I was at dinner in Mr. Dodge’s house. Mr. Dodge did not smoke, and so he supposed that those were super-excellent cigars, because they were made for Mr. Morgan in Havana out of special tobacco and cost $1.66 apiece. Now whenever I buy a cigar that costs six cents I am suspicious of it. When it costs four and a quarter four and a quarter four and a quarter four-and-a-quarter or five cents I smoke it with confidence. I carried those sumptuous cigars home, after smoking one of them at Mr. Dodge’s house house house, house to show that I had no animosity, and here they lie ever since. They They They They cannot beguile me. I am waiting for somebody somebody somebody else somebody to come along whose lack of education will enable him to smoke them smoke them smoke them smoke and enjoy them. ones, and . . . them. ones, and . . . them. ones,. and . . . them. Paine marked the text in the margin from ‘and’ to ‘them.’ in blue pencil to suggest omission; SLC deleted the text and altered the comma after ‘ones’ to a period but did not delete the passage ones,. and . . . them. ones. Well, that night at the Club Club Club Club meeting Club meeting —as I was saying— —as I was saying— —as I was speaking of, saying— —as I was saying— George, our colored butler, came to me when the supper was nearly over, and I noticed that he was pale. Normally his complexion was a clear black, and very handsome, but now it had modified to old amber. He said, “Mr. Clemens, said, ¶ “Mr. Clemens, said no ¶ “Mr. Clemens said ¶ “Mr. Clemens said: ¶ “Mr. Clemens, said: ¶ “Mr. Clemens, what are we going to do? There is not a cigar in the house but those old Wheeling long nines. Wheeling long nines. Virginia, Wheeling, “long nines.” Wheeling “‘long nines.”’ Wheeling ‘long nines.’ Hobby, probably confused by SLC’s marking on TS2, typed no quotation marks Wheeling long nines. Can’t nobody smoke them but you. They kill at thirty yards. It is too late to telephone—we couldn’t get any cigars out from town—what can we do? Ain’t it best to say nothing, and let on that we didn’t think?” think?” think?” think?” “No” ¶ “No” no ¶ “No” ¶ “No” ¶ “No,” ¶ “No,” I said, “that would not be honest. Fetch out the long nines” long nines” “long nines” “long nines”” SLC canceled both quotation marks, then reinscribed the necessary closing ones long nines” Hobby, probably confused by SLC’s marking on TS2, typed no quotation marks long nines” —which he did. I had just come across those “long nines” a few days or a week before. I hadn’t seen a long nine long nine “long nine” “long nine” long nine for years. When I was a cub pilot on the Mississippi Mississippi Misissippi Mississippi in the late ’50s, ’50s, ’60’s, ’60’s, ’50’s, ’50’s, I had had a great affection for them, because they were not only—to my mind— only—to my mind— only,—to my mind,— only—to my mind— perfect, but you could get a basketful of them for a cent—or a dime, they didn’t use cents out there out there out there out there in those days. So when I saw them advertised in Hartford I sent for a thousand at once. They were sent were sent were sent were sent came Paine bracketed ‘were sent’ in pencil and interlined ‘came’; SLC deleted ‘were sent’ and accepted his suggestion by inserting a caret came out to me in badly battered and disreputable-looking old square pasteboard boxes, two two about two about two two hundred in a box. George brought the the the the a Paine bracketed ‘the’ in pencil and interlined ‘a’; SLC deleted ‘the’ and accepted his suggestion by inserting a caret a box, which was was had had was was caved in on all sides, looking the worst it could, and began to pass them around. The conversation had been brilliantly animated up to that moment—but now a but now a and a but now a but now a frost fell upon the company. That is to say, not all of a sudden, but the frost fell upon each man as he took up a cigar cigar cigar, cigar, cigar and and and, and held it poised in the air— air— air,— air— and there, in the middle, his sentence broke off. That That And that And t That That kind of thing kind of thing kind of thing kind of thing went on on not in on on all around the table, until when George had completed his crime the whole place was full of a thick solemnity and silence. Those men began to light the cigars. Rev. Dr. Parker was the first man to light. He took three or four heroic whiffs—then then then then gave it up. He got up with the remark remark excuse excuse remark remark that he had to go to the bedside of a dying parishioner, which I knew was a lie, because if that had been the truth he would have gone earlier. dying . . . earlier. dying . . . earlier. dying sick parishioner,. which I knew was a lie, subterfuge because if that had been the truth he would have gone earlier. Paine bracketed ‘lie’ in pencil and interlined ‘subterfuge’; SLC revised to ‘sick parishioner.’ and deleted ‘subterfuge’ sick parishioner. He started out. Rev. Dr. Burton was the next man. He took only one whiff, and and and he and followed Parker. He furnished a pretext, and you could see by the sound of his voice that he didn’t think much of the pretext, and was vexed with Parker for getting in ahead with a dying a dying a dying a dying an ailing an fictitious ailing a fictitious ailing client. Rev. Mr. Twichell Mr. Twichell Joe Twitchell Joe Mr. Twichell Mr. Twichell followed, with a good hearty pretext—nothing in it, and he didn’t expect anybody to find anything in it, but Twichell is always more or less honest, to this day, and it cost him nothing to say that with . . . Twichell . . . that with . . . Twitchell . . . that with . . . Twichell . . . that and said and said he had to go now because he must take the midnight train for Boston. Boston was the first place that occurred to him—he would have said Jerusalem if he had thought of it. him— . . . it. him— . . . it. him— . . . it. I suppose. him, I suppose. him, I suppose. It was only a quarter to eleven when they began to distribute distribute hand out hand out distribute distribute pretexts. At ten ten five five ten ten minutes to eleven all those people were out of the house, and praying, no doubt, that the pretext might be overlooked, in consideration of the circumstances. house, and . . . circumstances. house, and . . . circumstances. house,. and . . . circumstances. house. When nobody was left but George and me I was cheerful—I I I was glad— I was glad— I had no compunctions of conscience, no griefs of any kind. But George was beyond speech, because he held the honor and credit of the family above his own, and he was ashamed that this smirch had been put upon it. I told him to go to bed and try to sleep it off. I went to bed myself. At breakfast in the morning when George was taking taking taking taking passing passing a cup of coffee from Mrs. Clemens’s hand, coffee from Mrs. Clemens’s hand, coffee from Mrs. Clemens’s hand, coffee, from Mrs. Clemens’s hand, coffee, I saw it tremble in his hand. I knew by that sign that that not in that that there was something on his mind. He brought the cup the cup it the cup the cup to me and asked impressively, “Mr. ¶ “Mr. no ¶ “Mr. ¶ “Mr. ¶ “Mr. Clemens, how far is it from the front door to the upper gate?” I ¶ I no ¶ I ¶ I ¶ I said said said said, said, “It is a a one one a a hundred and twenty-five steps.” He ¶ He no ¶ He ¶ He ¶ He said said said said, said, “Mr. Clemens, you you you know, you you know, you you can start at the front door and you can go plumb to the upper gate and tread on one of them cigars every time.” time.” time.” time.” Now by this roundabout and gradual excursion I have arrived at that meeting of the Club at Reverend Reverend Rev. Frank Goodwin’s house which I spoke of a while back, and where that same word was used in my presence, and to me, which I mentioned as having been used by my mother as much as forty years before. Now . . . back, and . . . before. Now . . . back, and . . . before. Now . . . back, and . . . before. Now . . . back. It wasn’t true in detail, but in essentials it was. “leave out” written in the margin next to the deleted words It wasn’t true in detail, but in essentials it was. The subject under discussion discussion discussion discussion on the night in question discussion on the night in question was Dreams. The talk passed from mouth to mouth in the usual serene way. The late Charles Dudley Warner delivered his views in the smooth and pleasantly flowing fashion which he had learned in his early manhood when he was an apprentice to the legal profession. He always spoke pleasingly, always smoothly, always choicely, never excitedly, never aggressively, always kindly, gently, and always with a lambent and playful and inconspicuous thread of humor appearing and disappearing along through his talk, like the tinted lights in an opal. To my thinking, there was never much body to what he said, never much juice in it; never anything very substantial to carry away and think about, yet it was always a pleasure to listen to him. To . . . him. To . . . him. circled in blue pencil to indicate a temporary suppression To . . . him. bracketed and queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC Always his art was graceful and charming. Then came the late Colonel Colonel Col. Greene, who had been a distinguished soldier in the Civil War Civil War civil war , and who at the time that I speak of was high up in the Connecticut Mutual and on his way to become its President presently, and in time to die in that harness and leave behind him a blemishless reputation, at a time when the chiefs of the New York insurance companies insurance companies Insurance Companies were approaching the eternal doom of their reputations. Colonel Colonel Col. Greene discussed the Dream question in his usual way—that is to say, he began a sentence and went on and on, dropping a comma in here and there at intervals of eighteen inches, never hesitating for a word, drifting straight along like a river at half bank with no reefs in it; the surface of his talk as smooth as a mirror; his construction perfect, and fit for print without correction, as he went along. And when the hammer fell, at the end of his ten minutes, minutes, minutes, minutes, he dumped in a period right where he was and stopped—and it was just as good there as it would have been anywhere else in that ten minutes’ ten minutes’ ten-minutes’ sentence. You could look back over that speech and you’d find it dimly milestoned along with those commas which he had put in and which could have been left out just as well, because they merely staked staked marked staked staked out the march, and nothing more. They could not call attention to the scenery, because there wasn’t any. His speech was always like that—perfectly smooth, perfectly constructed; and when he had finished, no listener could go into court and tell what it was he had said. It was a curious style. It was impressive—you always thought, from one comma to another, that he was going to strike something presently, but he never did. But this time that I speak of, the burly and magnificent Rev. Dr. Burton sat with his eyes fixed upon Greene from the beginning of the sentence until the end of it. He looked as the lookout on a whaleship might look who was watching where a whale had gone down and was waiting and watching for it to reappear; and no doubt that was the figure that was in Burton’s mind, because when at last Greene finished, Burton threw up his hands and shouted “There she blows!” The elder Hamersley Hamersley Hammersley took his appointed ten minutes, easily, comfortably, with good phrasing, and most entertainingly—and this was always to be expected of the elder Hamersley Hamersley Hammersley . Then his son, Will Hamersley Hamersley Hammersley , a young lawyer, now this many years a Judge of the Connecticut Supreme Court, took his chance in the Dream question. And I can’t imagine anything more distressing than a talk from Will Hamersley Hamersley Hammersley —a talk from the Will Hamersley Hamersley Hammersley of those days of those days of those days ‘of those days’ underscored of those days . You always knew that before he got through he would certainly say something—something that you could carry away, something that you could consider, something that you couldn’t easily put out of your mind. But you also knew that you would suffer many a torture before he got that thing out. He would hesitate and hesitate hesitate and hesitate hesitate and hesitate hesitate , get to the middle of a sentence and search around and around and around for a word, get the wrong word, search again, get another wrong one, search again and again—and so he would go on in that way till everybody was in misery on his account, hoping that he would arrive in the course of time, and yet sinking deeper and deeper toward despair, with the conviction that this time he was not going to arrive. He would seem to get so far away from any possible goal that you would feel convinced that he could not cover the intervening space and get there before his ten minutes would come to an end and leave him suspended between heaven and earth. But, sure as a gun, before that ten minutes ended Will Hamersley Hamersley Hammersley would arrive at his point and fetch it out with such a round and complete and handsome and satisfying unostentatious crash that you would be lifted out of your chair with admiration and gratitude. Joe ¶ Joe ¶ Joe ¶ Joe Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell sometimes took his turn. If he talked, it was easily perceptible that it was because he had something to say, and he was always able to say it well. But almost as a rule, he said nothing, and gave his ten minutes to the next man—and whenever he gave it to Charles E. Perkins Charles E. Perkins Charles E. Perkins [Nevermindwho], alternative reading inserted and canceled in ink Charles E. Perkins he ran the risk of getting lynched on his way home by the rest of the membership. Charles E. Perkins Charles E. Perkins Charles E. Perkins Nevermindwho alternative reading inserted and canceled in ink Charles E. Perkins was the dullest white man in Connecticut—and he probably remains that to this day; I have not heard of any real competitor. Perkins would moon along, and moon along, and moon along, using the most commonplace, the most dreary, the most degraded English, with never an idea in it by any chance. But he never gave his ten minutes to anybody. He always used it up to the last second. Then there was always a little gap—had to be for the crowd to recover before the next man could begin. Perkins, when he would get entirely lost in his talk and didn’t know where he was in his idiotic philosophizings, would grasp at narrative, as the drowning man grasps at a straw. If a drowning man ever does that—which I doubt. If . . . doubt. If . . . doubt. If . . doubt. Then he would tell something in his experiences, thinking perhaps it had something to do with the question in hand. It generally hadn’t—and this time he told about a long and arduous and fatiguing chase which he had had in the Maine woods on a hot summer’s day, after some kind of a wild animal that he wanted to kill, and how at last, chasing eagerly after this creature across a wide stream, he slipped and fell on the ice, and injured his leg—whereupon a silence and confusion. Perkins noticed that something was wrong, and then it occurred to him that there was a kind of discrepancy in hunting animals on the ice in summertime, so he switched switched switched it switched off to theology. He always did that. that. that. Then there was—Wellnevermindwho. that. man—and . . . that. man.—and . . . that. canceled words circled in blue pencil to indicate a temporary suppression man—and . . . that. Paine wrote a bracket before ‘and’, perhaps to suggest the omission of a passage, but he wrote no closing bracket He was a rabid Christian, and member of Joe Twichell’s Twichell’s Twitchell’s Twichell’s church. Joe Twichell Twichell Twitchell Twichell could get together the most impossible Christians that ever assembled in anybody’s congregation; and as a usual thing he couldn’t run his church systematically on account of new deacons deacons deacons, deacons who didn’t understand the business—the recent deacons having joined their predecessors in the Penitentiary down there at Wethersfield. Perkins Perkins Perkins Wellnevermindwho circled in blue pencil to indicate a temporary suppression; blue pencil erased and alternative reading inserted and then deleted in ink Perkins would wind up with some very pious remarks—and in fact they all did that. Take the whole crowd—the crowd that was almost always present—and this remark applies to them. There was J. Hammond Trumbull, the most learned man in the United States. He knew everything—everything in detail that had ever happened in this world, and a lot that was going to happen, and a lot that couldn’t ever possibly happen. He was thoroughly posted, and yet if there was a prize offered offered up offered offered for the man that could put up the most uninteresting ten minutes’ talk, you wouldn’t know whether to bet on him or on on on not in Perkins—he would close with some piety. He . . . piety. He . . . piety. circled in blue pencil to indicate a temporary suppression; SLC also drew an ink line from the word before the passage to the word after it, suggesting omission He . . . piety. Henry C. Robinson—Governor Henry C. Robinson— Robinson— Robinson,— Robinson— a brilliant man, a most polished and effective and eloquent speaker, an easy speaker, a speaker who had no difficulties to encounter in delivering himself—always closed with some piety. A. C. Dunham, a man really great in his line—that is to say the commercial line—a great manufacturer, an enterprising man man mean man , a capitalist, a most competent and fascinating talker, a man who never opened his mouth without a stream of practical pearls flowing from it—he always closed with some piety—