About General Grant’s Memoirs About General Grant’s Memoirs 1885. About General Grant’s Memoirs 1885. (Spring.) flush left 1885. centered on the same line About General Grant’s Memoirs. flush left on a new line (Spring of 1885.) (Spring.) I want to set down somewhat of a history of General Grant’s memoirs. By way of preface I will make a remark or two indirectly connected therewith. During the Garfield campaign General Grant threw the whole weight of his influence and endeavor toward the triumph of the Republican Party. He made a progress through many of the states, chiefly the doubtful ones, and this progress was a daily and nightly ovation as long as it lasted. He was received everywhere by prodigious multitudes of enthusiastic people and people and people, and, to strain the facts a little little little, one might almost tell what part of the country the General was in in in, for the moment moment moment, by the red reflections on the sky caused by the torch processions and fireworks fireworks fire works . He was to visit Hartford Hartford Hartford, from Boston Boston Boston, and I was one of the committee sent to Boston to bring him down here. I was also appointed to introduce him to the Hartford people when the population and the soldiers should pass in review before him. On our way from Boston in the palace car car car, I fell to talking with Grant’s eldest son, Colonel Fred Grant, Grant, Grant, whom I knew very well, and it gradually came out that the General, General, General, so far from being a rich man, as was commonly supposed, had not even income enough to enable him to live as respectably respectably respectablyfully as a third-rate third-rate third rate physician. Colonel Grant told me that the General left the White House House House, at the end of his second term term term, a poor man, and I think he said he was in debt but I am not positively sure. (Said he was in debt $45,000, at the end of one of his terms.) (Said . . . terms.) (Said . . . terms.) Friends had given the General a couple of dwelling houses but he was not able to keep them them them, or live in or live in or or live in either of them. This was all so shameful and such a reproach to Congress that I proposed to take the General’s straitened straitened straightened circumstances as my text in introducing him to the people of Hartford. I knew that if this nation, which was rising up daily to do its chief citizen unparalleled honor, honor, honor, had it in its power power power, by its vote vote vote, to decide the matter, that it would turn his poverty into immeasurable wealth, in an instant. Therefore, the reproach lay not with the people but with their political representatives in Congress and my speech could be no insult to the people. I clove to my plan, and, in introducing the General, I referred referred refered to the dignities and emoluments lavished upon the Duke of Wellington by England and contrasted with that conduct our far finer and higher method toward toward of allowing toward the savior of our country: to wit—the simple carrying him in our hearts without burdening him with anything to live on. In his reply, the General, of course, said that this country had more than sufficiently rewarded him and that he was well satisfied. He could not have said anything else, necessarily. A few months later later later, I could not have made such a speech, for for for, by that time time time, certain wealthy citizens had privately made up a purse of a quarter of a quarter of half a quarter of a million dollars for the General, and had invested it in such a way that he could not be deprived of it either by his own want of wisdom or the rascality of other people. Later still, the firm of Grant and Ward, brokers and stock-dealers, stock-dealers, stock-dealers was established at number 2, Wall street, New York City. This firm consisted of General Grant’s sons and a brisk young man by the name of Ferdinand Ward. The General was also also also, in some way way way, a partner, partner, partner, but did not take any active part in the business of the house. In a little time the business had grown to such proportions that it was apparently not only profitable but it was prodigiously so. The truth was, however, that Ward was robbing all the Grants and everybody everybody every body else that he could get his hands on on on, and the firm was not making a penny. The General was unsuspicious, and supposed that he was making a vast deal of money, whereas whereas whereas, indeed indeed indeed, he was simply losing such as he had, for Ward was getting it. About the 5th of May, May, November, May, I think it was, 1884, the crash came came came, and the several Grant families found themselves absolutely penniless penniless pennyless . Ward had even captured the interest due on the quarter of a of a of million dollars of the Grant fund, fund, fund, which interest had fallen due only a day or two before the failure. General Grant told me that that month, that month, that month, for the first time in his life, first time in his life, first time in his life, comma inserted by Redpath; ‘first time in his life,’ underscored by SLC he had paid his domestic bills bills bills on the first of the month with checks. They came checks. They came checks. which that had come They came Redpath deleted ‘which’ and inserted ‘that’; SLC underscored ‘checks’ and inserted a period after it, then he inserted ‘They came’ back upon his hands dishonored. He told me that Ward had spared no one connected with the Grant name name name, however remote—that he had taken all that the General could scrape together and $45,000 that the General had borrowed on his wife’s dwelling house in New York; York; York: that he had taken $65,000—the sum for which Mrs. Mrs. Mrs Grant had sold, recently, one of the houses which had been presented to the General; General; General: that he had taken $7,000 $7,000 $7000 , which some poverty-stricken nieces of his his his, in the West West West, had recently received by bequest, received by bequest, invested, received by bequest, Redpath inserted the comma following ‘invested’; deletion and insertion by SLC and which was all the money they had in the world—that, in a word, Ward had utterly stripped everybody connected with the Grant family. It was necessary that something be immediately done toward getting bread. The bill to restore to General Grant the title and emoluments of a full General in the army, on the retired list, had been lagging for a long time in Congress—in the characteristic, contemptible and stingy congressional fashion. No relief was to be looked for from that source, mainly because Congress chose to avenge on General Grant the veto of the Fitz-John Porter Bill by President Arthur. The editors of the Century Magazine Magazine Magazine, some months before before before, conceived the excellent idea of getting the surviving heroes of the late Civil War, on both sides, to write out their personal reminiscences of the war and publish them them them, now now now, in the magazine. But the happy project had come to grief, for the reason that that that, some of some of whereas some of deletion by Redpath, insertion by SLC these heroes were quite willing to write out these things only under one only under one only under the one condition condition condition, that they insisted on as essential. essential. essential. ,that master condition was wanting. They refused to write a line unless the leading actor of the war should also write.Aug. ’85. They deny this now, but I go bail I got that statement from Gilder himself. SLC *Aug. ’85 . . . SLC July ’85. Aug. ’85 . . . SLC paraph inserted vertically in the right margin write.* write. All persuasions and arguments failed on General Grant. He would not write; write; write: so, the scheme fell through. Now, however, the complexion of things had changed and General General Gen. Grant was without bread. [Not figurative, but actual.] [Not figurative, but actual.] [Not figurative, but o actual.] The Century people went to him once more and now he assented eagerly. A great series of war articles was immediately advertised by the Century publishers. I knew nothing of all this, although I had been a number of times to the General’s house house house, to pass half an hour hour hour, talking and smoking a cigar. However, However, However, I was reading one night night night, in Chickering Hall Hall Hall, early in November, 1884, and as my wife and I were leaving the building we stumbled over Mr. Mr. Mr Gilder Gilder Guilder , the editor of the Century, and went home with him to a late supper at his house. We were there an hour or two and two and two, and, in the course of the conversation conversation conversation, Gilder said that General Grant had written three war articles for the Century and was going to write a fourth. I pricked up my ears. Gilder went on to describe how eagerly General Grant had entertained the proposition to write when it had last been put to him him him, and how poor he evidently was was was, and how eager to make some trifle of bread and butter money money money: and how the handing him a check for $500 $500 five hundred dollars for the first article had manifestly gladdened his heart and lifted from it a mighty burden. The thing which astounded me was, was, was, that, admirable man as Gilder certainly is, is, is, and with a heart which is in the right place, it had never seemed to occur to him that to offer General Grant $500 $500 five hundred dollars for a magazine article was not only not only not only the monumental insult of the nineteenth century, century, century not only but of all centuries. He ought to have known that that that, if he had given General Grant a check for $10,000 $10,000 ten thousand dollars, the sum would still have been trivial; trivial; trivial: that if he had paid him $20,000 $20,000 twenty thousand dollars for a single article the sum would still have been inadequate; inadequate; inadequate: that if he had paid him $30,000 $30,000 thirty thousand dollars for a single magazine war war war article ‘article’ inserted by Redpath; ‘war’ added to insertion by SLC article it still could not be called paid for; for; for: that if he had given him $40,000 $40,000 forty thousand dollars for a single magazine article he would still be in General Grant’s debt. Gilder went on to say that it had been impossible, months before, to get General Grant to write a single line, but that now that he had once got started it was going to be as impossible to stop him again; again; again: that, in fact, General Grant had set out deliberately out deliberately out, deliberately, to write his memoirs in full full full, and to publish them in book form. I went straight to General Grant’s house next morning and told him what I had heard. He said it was all true. I said I had foreseen a fortune in such a book when I had tried in 1881 tried in 1881 tried, in 1881, to get him to write it; it; it: that the fortune was just as sure to fall now. I asked him who was to publish the book, and he said doubtless the Century Company. I asked him if the contract had been drawn and signed? He said it had been drawn in the rough but not signed yet. I said I had had a long and painful experience in book making and publishing and that if there would be no impropriety in his his the his showing me the rough contract I believed I might be useful to him. He said there was no objection whatever to my seeing the contract, contract, contract, since it had proceeded no further than a mere consideration of its details details details, without promises given or received on either side. He added that he supposed that the Century offer was fair and right and that he had that he had the contract had that he had ‘the’ deleted by typed slashes been expecting to accept it and conclude the bargain or contract. contract. contract. He read the rough draft aloud aloud aloud, and I didn’t know whether to cry or laugh. Whenever a publisher in the trade trade “trade” thinks enough of the chances of an unknown author’s book to print it it it, and put it it in on the market, market, market, he is willing to risk paying the man 10 10 ten per cent royalty royalty royalty, and that is what he does pay him. He can well venture that much of a royalty but he cannot well venture any more. If that book shall sell 3,000 or 4,000 3,000 or 4,000 3000 or 4000 copies there is no loss on any ordinary book, and both parties have made something; something; something: but whenever the sale shall reach 10,000 copies the publisher is getting the lion’s share of the profits and would continue to get the lion’s share as long thereafter as the book should continue to sell. When such a book is sure to sell 35,000 copies an author ought to get 15 per cent: that is to say, say, say, one-half of the net net nett profit. When a book is sure to sell 80,000 80,000 80,000 or more, he ought to get 20 per cent royalty: that is, two-thirds of the total profits. Now, here was a book that was morally bound to sell several hundred thousand copies in the first year of its publication and yet the Century people had had the hardihood to offer General Grant the very same 10 10 ten per cent royalty which they would have offered to any unknown Comanche Indian whose book they had reason to believe might sell 3,000 or 4,000 or 5,000 3,000 or 4,000 or 5,000 3 or 4 or 5000 copies. If I had not been acquainted with the Century people I should have said that this was a deliberate attempt to take advantage of a man’s ignorance and trusting nature, nature, nature, to rob him; him; him,; comma mended to a semicolon but I do know the Century people and therefore I know that they had no such base intentions as these but were simply making their offer out of their boundless resources of ignorance and stupidity. They were anxious to do book publishing as well as magazine publishing, publishing, publishing, and had tried one book already, already, already, but owing to their inexperience had made a failure of it. So, I suppose they were anxious, and had made an offer which in the General’s instance commended itself as as as a reasonable and safe, safe, safe: showing that they were lamentably ignorant and that they utterly failed to rise to the size of the the this the occasion. This was sufficiently shown in the remark of the head of that firm to me a few months later: a remark which I shall refer to and quote in its proper place. I told General Grant that the Century offer was simply absurd and should not be considered for an instant. I forgot to mention that the rough draft made two propositions—one at 10 10 ten per cent royalty royalty royalty, and the other the offer of half the profits on the book half . . . book half . . . book, comma inserted by Redpath; ‘half . . . book,’ underscored by SLC after subtracting every sort of expense connected with it every . . . it every . . . it ‘every . . . it’ underscored , including office rent, clerk hire, advertising office rent . . . advertising office rent . . . advertising, comma inserted by Redpath; ‘office rent, . . . advertising,’ underscored twice by SLC for small capitals and EVERYTHING ELSE EVERYTHING ELSE EVERYTHING ELSE ‘everything else’ underscored three times to capitalize , a most complicated arrangement and one which no business-like author would accept in preference to a 10 10 ten per cent royalty. They manifestly regarded 10 per cent and half profits as the same thing—which shows that these innocent geese expected the book to sell only 12,000 or 15,000 copies. They . . . 12,000 or 15,000 copies. They . . .12 or 15000 copies. I told the General that I could tell him exactly what he ought to receive: that, if he accepted a royalty, royalty, royalty, it ought to be 20 20 twenty per cent on the retail price of the book, or or or, if he preferred the partnership policy policy policy, then he ought to have 70 70 seventy per cent of the profits on each volume volume volume, over and above the mere cost of making the . . . making the . . . making ‘the . . . making’ underscored that volume. I said that that that, if he would place these terms before the Century people people people, they would accept them; them; them,; colon mended to a semicolon but, if they were afraid to accept them, them, them, he would simply need to offer them to any great publishing house in the country country country, and not one would decline them. If any should decline them let me me me ‘me’ underscored have the book. I was publishing my own book, book, book, under the business name of Charles L. Webster & Co., I being the company, company, company, (and (and (and Webster being my business man, man, man, on a salary, salary, salary,) Redpath inserted the comma and SLC inserted a redundant close parenthesis with a one-tenth interest,) with . . . interest,) with . . . interest,) and I had what I believed to be much the best-equipped best-equipped best equipped subscription establishment in the country. I wanted the General’s book book book, and I wanted it very much, much, much, but I had very little expectation of getting it. I supposed that he would lay these new propositions before the Century people, that they would accept immediately, and that there the matter would end, end, end,; comma mended to a semicolon for the General evidently felt under great obligations to the Century people for saving him from the grip of poverty by paying him $1,500 $1,500 $1500 for three magazine articles which were well worth $100,000; $100,000; a $100,000:;— colon mended to a semicolon and a dash and he seemed wholly unable to free himself from this sense of obligation, whereas obligation, whereas obligation,; wherea, comma mended to a semicolon to my mind mind mind, he ought rather to have considered the Century people under very high obligations to him, him, him, not only for making them a present of $100,000, $100,000, $100,000, but for procuring for them a great and desirable series of war articles from the other heroes of the war war war, which they could never have got their hands on if he had declined to write. (According to Gilder.) (According to Gilder.) (According to Gilder.) I now went away on a long western tour on the platform, platform, platform, but Webster continued to call at the General’s house and watch the progress of events. Colonel Fred Grant was strongly opposed to letting the Century people have the book and was and was and, was, at the same time time time, as strongly in favor of my having it. The General’s first magazine article had immediately added 50,000 names to their list of subscribers and thereby established the fact that the Century people would still have been the gainers if they had paid General Grant $50,000 for the articles—for the reason that they could expect to keep the most of these subscribers for several years years years, and and and, consequently consequently consequently, get a profit out of them in the end of $100,000 at least. Besides this increased circulation, the number of the Century’s advertising pages at once at once at once doubled—a huge addition to the magazine’s cash income in in in itself. (An addition of $25,000 a month as I estimate it from what I have paid them for one-fifth of a page for six months [$1,800].) (An . . . one-fifth . . . six months [$1,800].) (An . . . 1/5 . . . 6 months ($1800.) The Century people had eventually added to the original check of $1,500 $1,500 $1500 a check for $1,000 $1,000 a thousand dollars, after perceiving that they were going to make a fortune out of the first of the three articles. This seemed a fine liberality to General Grant, Grant, Grant, who is the most simple-hearted of all men; men; men:; colon mended to a semicolon but but but, to me me me, it seemed merely another exhibition of incomparable nonsense, nonsense, stinginess, nonsense, comma following ‘stinginess’ inserted by Redpath; deletion and insertion by SLC as the added check ought to have been for $30,000 instead of $1,000. $1,000. $100,000. $1,000. Colonel Fred Grant looked upon the matter just as I did, and had determined to keep the book out of the Century Century Century’s people’s hands if possible. This action merely confirmed and hardened him in his purpose. purpose. opinion of them. purpose. While I was in the West, propositions from publishers came to General Grant daily, and these propositions had a common form—to wit: “Only “Only “Only tell us what your best offer is and we stand ready to make a better one.” one.” one.” The Century people were willing to accept the terms which I had proposed to the General but they offered nothing better. The American Publishing Company of Hartford offered the General 70 70 seventy per cent of the profits but would make it more if required. These things began to have their effect. The General began to perceive perceive perceive, from these various views views views, that he had narrowly escaped making a very bad bargain for his book book book; and now he began to incline toward me me me, for the reason, no doubt, reason, no doubt, reason, no doubt, that I had been the accidental cause of stopping that bad bargain. He called in George W. Childs of Philadelphia and laid the whole matter before him and asked his advice. Mr. Childs said to me afterwards that it was plain to be seen that the General, on the score of friendship, General, on the score of friendship, General, ion the ? score of friendship, was so distinctly inclined toward me that the advice which would please him best would be the advice to the advice to th the advice to turn the book over to me. He advised the General to send competent people to examine into my capacity to properly publish the book and into the capacity of the other competitors for the book. (This was done at my own suggestion—Fred Grant was present.) And if book. (This . . . present.) And if book: and. (This . . . present.) if SLC mistakenly placed the caret for his insertion following ‘and.’ (the period was a typing error) they found that my house was as well equipped equipped equipped as the others in all ways as the others, others, others, that he give the book to me. The General sent persons selected by a couple of great law firms (Clarence Seward’s was one,) (Clarence . . . one,) (Clarence . . . one,) to make examinations, examinations, examinations, and Colonel Fred Grant made similar examinations for himself personally. The verdict in these several cases was that my establishment was as competent to make a success of the book as as as as was that of any of the firms competing. The result was that the contract was drawn and the book was placed in my hands. In the course of one of my business talks with General Grant he asked me if I felt sure I could sell 25,000 copies of his book and he asked the question in such a way that I suspected that the Century people had intimated that that was about the number of the books books books that they thought thought thought it ought to sell. [See Roswell Smith’s remark, later on.] [See . . . on.] [See . . . on.] I replied that the best way for a man to express an opinion in such a case was to put it in money—therefore, I would make this offer: if he would give me the book I would advance him the sum of $25,000 on each volume the moment the manuscript was placed in my hands, and if I never got the $50,000 back again, out of the future copyrights due, I would never ask him to return any part of the money to me. The suggestion seemed to distress distress distress ‘distress’ underscored him. He said he could not could not could nt could not think of taking in advance any sum of money large or small which the publisher would not be absolutely sure sure sure ‘sure’ underscored of getting back again. Some time afterwards when the contract was being drawn and the question was whether it should be 20 20 twenty per cent royalty or 70 70 seventy per cent of the profits, profits, profits, he inquired which of the two propositions would be the best all round all round all round ‘all round’ underscored . I sent Webster Webster Webster to him to tell him that the 20 20 twenty per cent royalty would be the best for him, for the reason that it was the surest, the simplest, the easiest to keep track of, and, better still, would pay him a trifle more, no doubt, more, no doubt, more, no doubt, than with the other plan. He thought the matter over and then said in substance that by the 20 20 twenty per cent plan he he he ‘he’ underscored would be sure to make, make, make , while the publisher might possibly lose: therefore, he would not have the royalty plan, but the 70-per-cent-profit plan; plan, but . . . plan; plan, but . . . plan; since if there were profits he could not then then then get them all but the publisher would be sure to get 30 per cent of it. This was just like like likye General Grant. It was absolutely impossible for him to entertain for a a one a moment any proposition which might prosper him at the risk of any other man. After the contract had been drawn and signed I remembered I had offered to advance the General some money and that he had said he might possibly need $10,000 before the book issued. The circumstance had been forgotten and was not in the contract but I had the luck to remember it before leaving town; town; town: so I went back and told Colonel Fred Grant to draw upon Webster for the $10,000 $10,000 ten thousand dollars whenever it should be wanted. That was the only thing forgotten in the contract and it was now rectified and everything was was was now smooth. And now I come to a circumstance which I have never spoken of and which cannot be known for many years to come, come, come, for this paragraph must not be published until the mention of so private a matter cannot offend any living person. The contract was drawn by the great law firm of Alexander & Green Green Green, on my part part part, and Clarence Seward, son of Mr. Lincoln’s Secretary of State, on the part of General Grant. Appended to the contract was a transfer of the book to General General Gen. Grant’s wife, wife, wife, and the transfer from her to my firm for the consideration of $1,000 $1,000 one thousand dollars in hand paid. This was to prevent the General’s creditors from seizing the proceeds of the book. Webster had said yes yes “yes,” when the sum named was $1,000 $1,000 a thousand dollars, and and and, after he had signed the contract and was leaving the law office office office, he mentioned incidentally mentioned incidentally mentioned, incidentally, that the $1,000 $1,000 thousand dollars was of course a mere formality in such a paper paper paper, and and which and means nothing. But Mr. Seward took him privately aside aside aside, and said “No “No “No , it means just what it says—for the General’s family have not a penny in the house and they are waiting at this moment with lively anxiety for that small sum of money.” for . . . money.” for . . . money.” closing quotation marks inserted by Redpath; ‘for . . . money.’ underscored by SLC Webster was astonished. He drew a check at once and Mr. Seward gave it to a messenger boy, and told him to take it swiftly—by the speediest route—to General Grant’s house, and not let the grass grow under his feet. It was a shameful thing that the man who had saved this country and its government from destruction should still be in a position where so small a sum—so trivial an amount—as $1,000 $1,000 one thousand dollars , could be looked upon as a godsend godsend god’s send marked to join up . Everybody knew that the General was in reduced circumstances, but what a storm would have gone up all over the land if the people could have known that his poverty had reached such a point as this. The newspapers all over the land had been lauding the princely generosity of the Century people in paying General Grant the goodly sum of $1,500 $1,500 $1500 for three magazine articles, whereas articles, whereas articles,; whereas, comma mended to a semicolon if they had paid him the amount which was his just due for them he would still have been able to keep his carriage and not have been worrying about $1,000 $1,000 $1000 . Neither the newspapers nor the public were probably aware that fifty-five fifty-five fifty five years earlier the publishers of an annual in London had offered little Tom Moore twice $1,500 $1,500 $1500 for two two two ‘two’ underscored articles and had told him to make them long or short and to write about whatever he pleased. The difference between the financial value of any article written by Tom Moore in his best day and a war a war an a war article written by General Grant in these days was about as one to fifty. To go back a while. After being a month or two in the West, during the winter of 1884–5, I returned to the East, reaching New York about the 20th of February. No agreement had at that time been reached as to the contract, contract, contract, but I called at General Grant’s house simply to inquire after his health, health, health, for I had seen reports in the newspapers that he had been sick and confined to his house for some time. The last time I had been at his house he told me that he had stopped smoking smoking smoking, because of the trouble in his throat, throat, throat, which the physicians had said would be quickest cured in that way. But while I was in the West the newspapers had reported that this throat affection was believed to be in the nature of a cancer. However, on the morning of my arrival in New York York York, the newspapers had reported that the physicians had said that the General was a great deal better than he had been and was getting along very comfortably. So, when I called, at the house, I went up to the General’s room room room, and shook hands hands hands, and said I was very glad he was so much better and so well along on the road to perfect health again. He smiled and said “If it were only true.” Of course I was both surprised surprised surprized and discomfited discomfited discomfited, and asked his physician, Dr. Douglas, if the General were in truth not progressing as well as I had supposed. He intimated that the reports were rather rose-colored and that this affection was no doubt a cancer. I am an excessive smoker smoker smoker, and I said to the General that some of the rest of us must take warning by his case, but Dr. Douglas spoke up and said that this result must not be attributed altogether to smoking. He said it was probable that it had its origin origin origin ‘origin’ underscored in excessive smoking, smoking, smoking, but that that was not the certain reason of its manifesting itself at this time: that more than likely the real reason was the General’s distress of mind and year-long depression of spirit, arising from the failure of the Grant and Ward firm. This remark started the General at once to talking talking talking; and I found then then then, and afterwards that afterwards that afterwards, that, when he did not care to talk about any other subject, subject, subject, he was always ready and willing to talk about that one. He told what I have before related about the robberies perpetrated upon him him him , and upon all the Grant connection connection connection, by this man Ward, Ward, Ward, whom he had so thoroughly trusted, trusted, trusted but he never uttered a phrase concerning Ward which an outraged adult might not have uttered concerning an offending child. but . . . an outraged adult . . . child but . . . a father an outraged adult . . . son or child phrase underscored He spoke spoke speaks spoke as a man speaks who has been deeply wronged and humiliated and betrayed; betrayed; betrayed: but he never used a venomous expression or one of a vengeful nature. nature. nature. (OVER.) ☞ SLC wrote and deleted instructions to turn over; he rewrote them at 20.8 following ‘him.’ As for myself I was inwardly boiling all the time: I was scalping Ward, flaying him alive, breaking him on the wheel, pounding him to jelly, and cursing him with all the profanity known to the one language one language one languages that I am acquainted with, and helping it out out out, in times of difficulty and distress distress distress, with odds and ends of profanity drawn from the two other languages of which I have a limited limited limited—I may say a cursory— knowledge. He told his story with deep feeling in his voice, voice, voice, but with no betrayal upon his countenance of what was going on in his heart. He could depend upon that countenance of his in all emergencies. It always stood by him. It It In It never betrayed him. July 1st or 2d, 1885, (at Mount McGregor,) about three weeks before the General’s death, Buck Grant and I sat talking an hour to each other across the General’s lap—just to keep him company—he had only to listen. The news had just come that that Marine Bank man (Ward’s pal—what was that scoundrel’s name?) had been sent up for ten years. Buck Grant said the bitterest things about him he could frame his tongue to; I was about as bitter myself. The General listened for some time, then reached for his pad and pencil and wrote “He was not as bad as the other”—meaning Ward. It was his only comment. Even his writing looked gentle. ¶ July 1st or 2d, 1885, (at Mount McGregor,) about three weeks . . . ten years . . . gentle. ¶ July 1st or 2d, 1885, (at Mt. McGregor,) about 3 weeks . . . 10 years . . . gentle. inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over; in the margin to the left of the insertion SLC wrote ‘A parenthesis’ While he was talking, Colonel Grant said: “Father is letting you see that the Grant family are a pack of fools, Mr. Clemens!” The General combatted that statement. He said said said, in substance substance substance, that facts could be produced which would show that when Ward laid siege to a man that man would turn out to be a fool too—as much of a fool as any Grant: that all men were fools if the being successfully beguiled by Ward was proof proof proof, by itself itself itself, that the man was a fool. He began to present instances. He said, (in effect,) that nobody would call the President of the Erie Railroad a fool, fool, fool: yet Ward beguiled him to the extent of $800,000: robbed him of every cent of it. He mentioned another man who could not be called a fool, fool, fool,; comma mended to a semicolon yet Ward had beguiled that man out of more than half a million dollars and had given him nothing in return for it. He instanced instanced instancesd a man with a name something like Fisher, though that was not the name, whom he said nobody could call a fool: on the contrary, contrary, contrary a man who had made himself very rich by being sharper and smarter than other people and who who who always prided himself upon his smartness smartness smartness, and upon upon upon the fact that he could not be fooled, he could not be deceived by anybody; anybody; anybody: but what did Ward do in his case? He fooled him into buying a portion of a mine belonging to ex-Senator Chaffee—a property which was not for sale, which Ward could produce no authority for selling—yet he got out of that that that ‘that’ underscored man $300,000 $300,000 $300,000, in cash, without the passage of a single piece of paper paper paper, or a line of writing, to show that the sale had been made. This man came to the office of Grant and Ward every day for a good while while while, and talked with Ward about the prospects of that rich mine, and and (and it was was was ‘was’ underscored very rich, rich, rich,) and these two would pass directly by Mr. Chaffee and go into the next room and talk. You would think that a man of his reputation for shrewdness would at some time or other have concluded to ask Mr. Chaffee Chaffee Chafee a question or two; two; two; but, no: Ward had told this man that Chaffee did not want to be known in the transaction at all, all, all: that he must seem to be at Grant and Ward’s office on other business, business, business, and that he must not venture to speak to Chaffee or the whole business would be spoiled. There There There ‘There’ underscored was a man who prided himself on being a smart business man and yet Ward robbed him of $300,000 without giving him a scrap of anything to show that the transaction had taken place place place, and to-day that man is not among the prosecutors of Ward at all for the reason perhaps reason perhaps reason, perhaps, that he would rather lose all of that money than have the fact get out that he was deceived in so childish a way. General Grant mentioned another man who was very wealthy, whom whom an whom no one would venture to call a fool, either business-wise or otherwise, yet this man came into the office one day and said “Ward, here is my check for $50,000 $50,000 $150,000 SLC also wrote and deleted one or two partly formed characters above this number , I have no use for it at present, I am going to make a flying trip to Europe; Europe; Europe,; comma mended to a semicolon turn it over for me, see what you can do with it.” Some time afterwards I was in the office when this gentleman returned from his trip and presented himself. He asked Ward if he had accomplished anything with that money? Ward said “Just wait a moment,” went to his books, turned over a page, mumbled to himself a few moments, drew a check for $250,000, handed it to this man with the air of a person who had really accomplished nothing worth talking of! The man stared at the check a moment, handed it back to Ward, and said “That “That “That is plenty good enough for me, set that hen again,” again,” again,” and he went out of the place. It was the last he ever saw of any of that money. I had been discovering fools all along when the General was talking, talking, talking, but this instance brought me to my senses. I put myself in this fellow’s fellow’s fellows’ place and confessed that if I had been in that fellow’s clothes it was a hundred to one that I would have done the very thing that he had done, and I was thoroughly well aware that, that, that, at any rate, rate, rate, there was not a preacher nor a widow widow widow who in Christendom who would not have done it: for these people are always seeking investments that pay illegitimately large sums; sums; sums; and they never, or seldom, never, or seldom, never, or seldom, stop to inquire into the nature of the business. When I was ready to go, Colonel Fred Grant went down stairs with me, and stunned me by telling me confidentially me confidentially me, confidentially, that the physicians were trying to keep his father’s real condition from him, but that in fact they considered him to be under sentence of death and that he would not be likely to live live leave live more than a fortnight or three weeks longer. This was about the 21st of February, 1885. 1885. 1885. paraph inserted in pencil After ¶ After new page ¶ (This is to be added without date to what was last written.) ¶ After the 21st of February February February, General Grant busied himself daily himself daily himself, daily, as much as his strength would allow allow allow, in revising the manuscript of his book. It was read to him by Colonel Grant Grant Grant, very carefully carefully carefully, and he made the corrections as he went along. He was losing valuable time because only one-half one-half one half or two-thirds of the second and last volume was as yet written. However, However, However, he was more anxious that what was written should be absolutely correct absolutely correct absolutely correct ‘absolutely correct’ underscored than that the book should be finished in an incorrect form form form, and then find himself unable to correct it. His memory was superb superb superb, and nearly any other man with such a memory would have been satisfied to trust it. Not so the General. No matter how sure he was of the fact or the date, date, date, he would never let it go until he had verified it with the official records. This constant and painstaking searching of the records records records cost a great deal of time, time, time, but it was not wasted. Everything stated as a fact in General Grant’s book may be accepted with entire confidence as being thoroughly trustworthy. Speaking of his memory, what a wonderful machine it was! He told me one day that he never made a report of the battles of the Wilderness until they were all over, and he was back in Washington. Then he sat down and made a full report from memory and memory and memory, and, when it was finished, finished, finished, examined the reports of his subordinates subordinates subordinates, and found that he had made hardly an error. To be exact, he said he had made two errors. To . . . errors. To . . . errors. This is his statement as I remember it, though my memory is not absolutely trustworthy and I may be overstating it. (These and other statements of mine to be laid before Colonel Fred Colonel Fred Col. F Grant for verification.) The General lost some more more other more time in one other way. Three Century articles had been written and paid for, but he had during the summer before promised to write a fourth one. He had written it in a rough draft but it had remained unfinished. The Century people had advertised these articles and were now fearful that the General would never be able to complete them. By this time the General’s condition had got abroad and the newspapers were full of reports about his perilous condition. The Century people called several times to get the fourth article article article, and this hurt and offended Colonel Colonel Col. Fred Grant Grant Grant, because he knew that they were aware, as was all the world, that his father was considered to be in a dying condition. Colonel Colonel Col. Grant thought that they ought to show more consideration—more humanity. By fits and starts starts starts, the General worked at that article whenever his failing strength would permit him him him, and was determined to finish it it it, if possible possible possible, because his promise had been given and he would in no way depart from it while any slight possibility remained of fulfilling it because . . . given . . . it because . . . given, . . . it comma inserted by Redpath; ‘because . . . given, . . . it’ underscored by SLC . I asked if there was no contract or no understanding as to what was to be paid by the Century people for the article. He said there was not. Then, I said, “Charge said, “Charge said. Charge them $20,000 for it. It is well worth it—worth double the money. Charge them this sum for it in its unfinished condition and let them have it it it, and tell them that it will be worth still more in case the General shall be able to complete it. This may modify their ardor somewhat somewhat somewhat, and bring you a rest.” rest.” rest. He was not willing to put so large a price upon it but thought that if he gave it to them he might require them to pay $5,000 $5,000 $5000 . It was plain that the modesty of the family in money matters was indestructible indestructible indestructable . Just about this time I was talking to General Badeau Badeau Bardou Badeau there one day day day, when I saw a pile of type-writer manuscript on the table and picked up the first page and began to read it. I saw that it was an account of the siege of Vicksburg. I counted a page and there were about three hundred words on the page: 18,000 18,000 18 or 20,000 words altogether. General Badeau Badeau Bardou Badeau said it was one of the three articles written by General Grant for the Century. I said, “Then they have no sort of right to require the fourth article, for there is matter enough in this one to make two or three ordinary magazine articles.” articles.” articles.” The copy of this and the other two articles were at this moment in the Century’s safe; safe; safe: the fourth article agreement was therefore most amply fulfilled already already already, without an additional article: yet the Century people considered that the contract would not be fulfilled without the fourth article and so insisted upon having it. At the ordinary price paid me for for for the Century articles, this Vicksburg article, if I had written it, would have been worth about $700. Therefore, the Century people had paid General Grant no more than they would have paid me, me, me: and this including including including ‘including’ underscored the $1,000 $1,000 $1000 gratuity which they had given him. It is impossible to overestimate the enormity of this gouge. If the Century people knew anything at all; all; all:; colon mended to a semicolon if they were not steeped steeped stepeped to the marrow in ignorance and stupidity, they knew that a single page of General Grant’s manuscript was worth more than a hundred of mine. But they were steeped to such a degree in ignorance and stupidity. They were honest, honorable and good-hearted people according to their lights, and if anybody could have made them see that it was shameful to take such an advantage of a dying soldier, soldier, soldier, they would have rectified the wrong. But all the eloquence that I was able to pour out upon them went for nothing, utterly for nothing. They still thought that they had been quite generous to the General and were not able to see the matter in any other light. Afterwards, at Mt. McGregor they consented to give up half of the Vicksburg article; and they did; they gave up more than half of it—cut it from twenty-two galleys down to nine, and only the nine will appear in the magazine. And they added $2,500 to the $2,500 already paid. Those people could learn to be as fair and liberal as anybody, if they had the right schooling. Afterwards, at Mt. McGregor . . . twenty-two . . . nine . . . nine . . . magazine . . . schooling. Afterwards, at Mount McGregor . . . 22 . . . 9 . . . 9 . . . magazine. Then we let ’em have that fourth article—the Wilderness. . . . schooling. I will make a diversion here, and get back upon my track again later. and . . . again later. and, later, and . . . again. later. While I was away with G. W. Cable, giving public readings in the theatres, lecture halls, skating rinks, jails jails jails and churches of the country, the travel was necessarily fatiguing and therefore fatiguing and therefore fatiguing; and, therefore, I ceased from writing letters excepting to my wife and children. This foretaste of heaven, this relief from the fret fret fret followed by a typed passage that SLC revised and then deleted: and torture] inseperable from the reading and answering a daily mass affliction of uninteresting, unnecessary and mainly idiotic correspondence of letter-answering, of letter-answering, of letter-answering was delightful, delightful, delightful,; comma mended to a semicolon but it finally left me in the dark concerning things which I ought to have been been been followed by a canceled caret with no insertion acquainted with at the moment. Among these the affairs of Karl Gerhardt, the young artist, should be mentioned. I had started out on this reading pilgrimage the day after the Presidential election: that is to say, say, say, I had started on the 5th 5th fifth of November and had visited my home only once between that time and the 2d 2d second of March following. During all these four months months months, Gerhardt Gerhardt Gerhart had been waiting for the verdict of that dilatory committee, and had taken it out in waiting: that is to say, say, say, he had sat still still still, and done nothing to earn his bread. He had been tirelessly diligent in asking for for for work in the line of his art art art, , and had used all possible means in that direction: he had written letters to every man he could hear of who was likely to need a mortuary monument for himself himself himself, , or his friends friends friends, , or acquaintances acquaintances acquaintances, , and had also applied for the the a the chance of a competition for a soldiers’ monument—for all things of this sort—but always without success; success; success: the natural result, result, result, as his name was not known. He had no reputation. When I closed my reading campaign at Washington, the last day of February, I came home and found the the that the state of things which I have just spoken of. Gerhardt had waited four long long long months on that committee which would have needed four centuries in which to make up its mind, and I was thoroughly provoked. I told him that he ought to have had more pride than to permit me to support him and his family during all that time with no assistance from his idle hands. He said that he had wanted to work and had felt the humiliation of the state of things as much as any one could, but that he had been afraid of the effect which it might have have have, if it became known that this artist artist artist, who was applying for statues and monuments monuments monuments, was not to be found in a studio but in some one’s workshop. I said I thought the argument had not a leg to stand on, on, on: that he ought to have made it his business to find something to do: that he ought to have been shoveling shoveling shovelling snow, sawing wood, all these four months, and that the revelation that he had been so engaged would have been a credit to him in anybody’s eyes whose respect was worth anything. It was hard to have to talk to him so plainly, but it was manifest that mere hints were valueless when leveled leveled levelled at him: I had tried them before. He said he would find some work to do immediately. He came back the next day and said he had got work at Pratt & Whitney’s shop and could go on corresponding with people about statues without interfering with that work. It seemed to me that Gerhardt compactly compactly compactly filled James James James Redpath’s definition of an artist: artist: artist: like a glove: “A man who has a sense of beauty and no sense of duty.” Once, J. Q. A. Ward, in speaking of his early struggles to get a status as a sculptor, had told me that he had made his beginning by hanging around the studios of sculptors of repute repute repute, and picking up odd jobs of journey work in them, them, them and for the sake of the bread bread bread he could gain in that way. I had turned this suggestion over to Gerhardt, Gerhardt, Gerhardt,; comma mended to a semicolon but his reply reply reply, from Paris Paris Paris, had been an almost indignant scouting of the idea, as being a thing which no no no a no true artist could could could hardly bring himself to do; do; do: and I saw by that that Gerhardt was a true artist because he was manifestly was manifestly was manifestly was entirely determined not to do it. I may as well say here here here, and be done with it it it, that my connection with Gerhardt had very little sentiment in it, from my side of the house, house, house,; comma mended to a semicolon and no romance. I took hold of his case, in the first place, solely because I had become convinced that he had it in him to become a very capable sculptor. I was not adopting a child, I was not adding a member to the family, I was merely taking upon myself a common duty—the duty of helping a man who was not able to help himself. I never expected him to be grateful, I never expected him to be thankful—my experience of men had long ago taught me that one of the surest ways of begetting an enemy was to do some stranger an act of kindness which should lay upon him the irritating sense of an obligation. Therefore my connection with Gerhardt had nothing sentimental or romantic about it. I told him in the first place that if the time should ever come when he could pay back to me the money expended upon him him him, and pay it without inconvenience to himself, I should expect it expect it require it expect it at his hands, and that that that, when it was was was ‘was’ underscored paid paid paid, I should consider the account entirely requited—sentiment and all: that that that that act would leave him free free fully free from any obligation to me. It was well well well, all round round round, that things had taken that shape in the beginning beginning beginning, and had kept it, it, it,; comma mended to a semicolon for, if the foundation had been sentiment, sentiment, sentiment that sentiment would have grown sour when I saw that he did not want to work for a living living living, in outside ways ways ways, when art had no living living living, to offer. It had saved me from applying applying applying, in his case case case, a maxim of mine mine mine, that that that, whenever a man preferred being fed by any other man to starving in independence he ought to be shot. One evening Gerhardt appeared in the library and I hoped he had come to say he was getting along very well at the machine shop and was contented; contented; contented: so I was disappointed when he said he had come to show me a small bust he had been making, in clay, of General Grant, from a photograph. I was the more irritated for the reason that I had never seen a portrait of General Grant— Grant— Grant— in oil, water-colors, crayon, steel, wood, photograph, plaster, plaster, plaster, marble or any other material,— material,— material,— that was to me at all satisfactory; and, therefore, satisfactory; and, therefore, satisfactory,; and, therefore, comma mended to a semicolon I could not expect that a person who had never even seen the General could accomplish anything worth considering in the way of a likeness of him. However, when he uncovered the bust my prejudices vanished at once. The once. The once ¶ The thing was not correct in its details, yet it seemed to me to be a closer approach to a good likeness of General Grant than any one which I had ever seen before. Before uncovering it it it, Gerhardt had said he had brought it in the hope that I would show it to some member of the General’s family, and get that member that member them that member to point out its chief defects defects defects, for correction; correction; correction: but I had replied replied replied at once that I could not venture to do that, that, that,; comma mended to a semicolon for there was a plenty of was a plenty of were was a plenty other of people to pester these folks without me adding myself to the number. But a glance at the bust had changed all that that that, in an instant. I said I would go to New York in the morning and ask ask get ask the family to look at the bust and that he must come along to be within call in case they took enough interest in the matter to point out out out the defects. We reached the General’s house at one o’clock the next afternoon, and I left Gerhardt Gerhardt Gebrhardt and the bust below and went up stairs to see the family. And now, for the first time, the thought came into my my mey mind, that perhaps that perhaps that, perhaps, I was doing a foolish thing, thing, thing,; comma mended to a semicolon that the family must of necessity have been pestered with such matters as this so many times that the very mention of such a thing must be nauseating to them. However, However, However, I had started and so I might as well finish. Therefore Therefore Therefore, I said I had had have had a young artist down stairs who had had hasd been making a small bust of the General from a photograph photograph photograph; and I I who I wished they would look at it, if they were willing to do me that kindness. Jesse Grant’s wife spoke up with eagerness and said “Is “Is “Is it the artist who made the the a the bust of you that is in Huckleberry Finn?” Finn?” Finn?” I said, yes. yes. “yes.” She said said said, with great animation, “How good it was of you, Mr. Clemens, to think of that!” She expressed this lively gratitude to me in various ways until I began to feel somehow a great sense of merit in having originated this noble idea of having a bust of General General Gen. Grant made by so excellent an artist. I will not not dot do my sagacity the discredit of saying that I did anything anything nothing by word or action or gesture anything to remove or modify this impression that I had originated the idea and carried it out to its present state through my own ingenuity and diligence. Mrs. Jesse Grant added, “How added, “How added, “How strange it is; is; is,; comma mended to a semicolon only two nights ago I dreamed that I was looking at your bust in Huckleberry Finn Huckleberry Finn “Huckleberry Finn” Redpath inserted quotation marks and SLC deleted them and thinking how nearly perfect it was, was, was, and then I thought that I conceived the idea of going to you and asking you if you could not hunt up that artist and get him to make a bust of father!” father!” father!” Things were going on very handsomely! The persons present were Colonel Fred Colonel Fred Col. Fred. Grant, Mrs. Mrs. Mrs Jesse Grant, and Dr. Douglas Douglas Douglass . I went down for Gerhardt and he brought up the bust and uncovered it. All of the family present exclaimed over the excellence of the likeness, and Mrs. Mrs. Mrs Jesse Grant expended some more unearned gratitude upon me. The family began to discuss the details details details, and then checked themselves and begged Gerhardt’s Gerhardt’s Gerhardt’s pardon for criticising. Of course course course, he said that their criticisms were exactly what he wanted wanted wanted, and begged them to go on. The General’s wife said that that that, in that case case case, they would be glad to point out what seemed to them inaccuracies, inaccuracies, inaccuracies, but that he must not take their speeches as being criticisms upon his art at all. They found two inaccuracies: inaccuracies: inaccuracies: in the shape of the nose and nose and nose, and, Redpath inserted both commas and SLC deleted them the the the other, the Redpath inserted the comma and SLC deleted the phrase shape of the forehead. All were agreed that the forehead was wrong, but there was a lively a lively the a livelyiest dispute about the nose. Some of those present contended that the nose was nearly right—the others contended that it was distinctly wrong. The General’s wife knelt on the ottoman to get a clearer view of the bust bust bust, and the the the others stood about her—all talking at once. Finally Finally Finally, the General’s wife said, hesitatingly, with the mien mien mein of one who is afraid he is taking a liberty and liberty and liberty— and asking too much—“If Mr. Mr. Mr Gerhardt could see the General’s nose and forehead forehead forehead, himself, himself, himself, that would dispose of this dispute at once”; once”; once”: finally, “The “The “The General is in the next room—would Mr. Gerhardt mind going in there and making the correction himself?” Things were indeed progressing handsomely! Of course, Mr. Gerhardt lost no time in expressing his willingness. While the controversy was going on concerning the nose and the forehead, Mrs. Fred Grant joined the group, and then presently then presently then, presently, each of the three ladies ladies ladies, in turn turn turn, disappeared for a few minutes minutes minutes, and came back with a handful of photographs and hand-painted miniatures miniatures minatures of the General. These pictures had been made in every quarter of the world. One of them had been painted in Japan. But, good as many of these pictures were were were, they were worthless as evidence evidence evidence, for the reason that they contradicted each other in every detail. detail. detail, in every particular. The photograph apparatus had lied as distinctly and as persistently as had had had the hands of the miniature-artists miniature-artists minature-artists . No two noses were alike and no two foreheads were alike. We stepped stepped started and went stepped into the General’s room—all but General General Gen. Badeau and Dr. Douglas Douglas Douglass . The General was stretched out in a reclining chair with his feet supported upon an ordinary chair. chair. chair. in a bay window. He was muffled up in dressing gowns and afghans with afghans with afghans; and with his black woolen skull-cap skull-cap skull-cap on his head. The ladies took the skull-cap skull-cap skull-cap off off off, and began to discuss his nose nose nose, and his forehead forehead forehead, and they made him turn this way way way, and that way way way, and the other way way way, to get different views and profiles of his features. He took it all patiently and made no complaint. He allowed them to pull pull affectionately pull and haul him about about about, in their own affectionate affectionate affectionate fashion fashion fashion, without a a a murmur. Mrs. Fred Grant, who is very beautiful and of the most gentle and loving character, was very active in this service service service, and very deft deft delft, Redpath inserted the comma and SLC corrected the word with her graceful hands hands hands, in arranging arranging arrangeing and re-arranging the General’s head for inspection inspection inspection, and repeatedly called attention to the handsome shape of his head—a thing which reminds me that Gerhardt had picked up an old plug hat of the General’s down stairs stairs stairs, and had remarked upon the perfect oval perfect oval perfect-oval shape of the inside of it, this oval being so uniform that the wearer of the hat could never be able to know know know, by the feel of it it it, whether he had it right-end right-end right-end in front front front, or wrong-end wrong-end wrong-end in front, whereas front, whereas front,; whereas, comma mended to a semicolon the average man’s head is broad broad so shaped that the one end of his hat is formed like a egg: big broad at one end and narrow at the other. The General’s wife placed him in various positions, none of which satisfied her, and finally and finally and, finally, she went to him and said—“Ulyss! Ulyss! Can’t you put your feet to the floor?” He did so at once and straightened himself up. up. out. up. During all this time, the General’s face wore a pleasant, contented contented contented, and, I should say, benignant aspect, aspect, aspect, but he never opened his lips once. As had often been the case before, so so so now, his silence gave ample room to guess at what was passing in his mind—and to take it out in guessing. I will remark, in passing, that the General’s hands were very thin, and they showed, far more than did his face, how his long siege of confinement and illness and insufficient food food food, had wasted him. He was at this time suffering suffering suffering from great and increasing pain from the cancer at the root of his tongue, tongue, tongue, but there there there was nothing ever discoverable in the expression of his face to betray this fact fact fact, as long as he was awake. When asleep asleep asleep, his face would take advantage of him and make revelations. At the end of fifteen minutes minutes minutes, Gerhardt said he believed he could correct the defects now. So, we went back to the other room. Gerhardt went to work on the clay image, everybody standing round, observing and discussing with the greatest interest. Presently, Presently, Presently, the General astonished us by appearing there, clad in his wraps, and supporting himself himself himself, in a somewhat unsure unsure trying and unsur unsure Redpath deleted ‘unsur’ on the typewriter and wrote a query in the margin; SLC deleted ‘trying and’ and recanceled ‘unsur’ way upon a cane. He sat down on the sofa and said he could sit there there there, if it would be for the advantage of the artist. But his wife would not allow that. She said that he might catch cold. She was for hurrying him back at once to his invalid chair. He succumbed, succumbed, succoumbed, Redpath inserted the comma and SLC corrected the word and started back, back, back, but at the door but at the door but, at the door, Redpath inserted both commas and SLC deleted them he turned and said: “Then can’t Mr. Gerhardt bring the clay in here and work?” This was several hundred times better fortune than Gerhardt Gerhardt Gebrhardt could have dreamed of. He removed his work to to into the General’s room room room, at once. The General stretched himself out in his chair, chair, chair, but said that that that, if that position would not do, do, do, he would sit up. Gerhardt said it would do very well, well, well, indeed; indeed; indeed,; comma mended to a semicolon especially if it were more comfortable to the sitter sitter sitter, Redpath inserted the comma and SLC deleted it than any other would be. The General watched Gerhardt’s Gerhardt’s Gebrhardt’s swift and noiseless fingers for some time with manifest manifest a manifest interest in in oin his face, face, face, and no doubt and no doubt and, no doubt, Redpath inserted both commas and SLC deleted them this novelty was a valuable thing to one who had spent so many weeks that were tedious with sameness and unemphasized with change or diversion. By and bye, one eyelid began to droop occasionally; occasionally; occasionally: then everybody stepped out of the room excepting Gerhardt Gerhardt Gebrhardt and myself myself myself, and I moved to the rear rear rear, where I would be out of sight and not be a disturbing element. Harrison, the General’s old colored body-servant, body-servant, body-servant, came in presently in presently in, presently, and remained a while watching Gerhardt, and then broke out out out— with great zeal and decision: decision: decision, his verdict—repeating it several times: Redpath inserted the comma and SLC deleted the phrase, inadvertently leaving the comma and canceling the colon “That’s the General! Yes, sir! That’s the General! Mind! I tell you! That’s the General!” Then he went away, and the place became absolutely silent. Within a few minutes afterwards the afterwards the afterwards, the General was sleeping, and for two hours he continued to sleep tranquilly, the serenity of his face disturbed only at intervals by a passing wave of pain. It was the first sleep sleep sleep that he had had for several weeks uninduced by narcotics. To my mind this bust, completed bust, completed bust, completed, Redpath inserted the comma following ‘completed’; SLC deleted it and inserted the comma following ‘bust’ at this sitting, sitting, sitting, has in it more of General Grant than can be found in any other likeness of him that him that him, which that has ever been made since he was a famous man. I think I think I think it may rightly be called the best portrait of General General Gen. Grant that is in existence. It has also a feature which must always be a remembrancer remembrancer remembrancesr to this nation of what the General was passing through during the long weeks of that spring. For, into the clay image went the pain which he he the General he was enduring but which did not appear in his face in his face there in his face when he was awake. Consequently, the bust has about it it it a something which is filled with a deep pathos: Redpath had originally typed ‘something of the deep pathos’, then, on the typewriter, deleted ‘of the deep pathos’ and followed it with ‘which is filled with a deep pathos’; in pencil he inserted ‘a’ to precede ‘something’; SLC deleted the entire passage a suggestion of patient and brave and manly suffering which is infinitely touching. At the end of two hours General General Gen. Badeau entered abruptly and spoke to the General and this woke him up. But for this animal’s animal’s animal’s interruption interruption interruption, he he the General might have slept as much longer longer longer, possibly. Gerhardt Gerhardt Gebrhart worked on as long as it was light enough to work work work, and then he went away. He He Gerhardt He was to come again, again, again, and did come the following day; day; day,; comma mended to a semicolon but, at the last moment, moment, moment, Colonel Fred Colonel Fred Col. Fred. Grant would not permit another sitting. He said that the face was so nearly perfect that he was afraid to allow it to be touched again, lest some of the excellence might be refined refined refined away out of it, instead of adding more excellence excellence excellence to it. He called attention to an oil painting on the wall down stairs and asked if we knew that man. We couldn’t name him—had never seen his face before. “Well,” said Colonel Colonel Col. Grant, “that was a perfect portrait of my father once: it was given up by all the family to be the best that had ever been made of him. We were entirely satisfied with it, but the artist, unhappily, was not: he wanted to to ‘to do a stroke or two to make it absolutely absolutely absoluteley perfect perfect perfect’ and he insisted on taking it back with him. After he had made those finishing touches it didn’t resemble my father or any one else. We took it, it, it, and have always kept it as a curiosity. But with that lesson behind us we will save this bust from a similar fate.” He allowed Gerhardt to work at the hair, however: he said he might expend as much of his talent on that as he pleased but must stop there. Gerhardt finished the hair to his satisfaction but never touched the face again. Colonel Colonel Col. Grant required Gerhardt to promise that he would take every pains with the clay bust bust bust, and then return it to him him him, to keep keep keep, as soon as he had taken a mould from it. This was done. Gerhardt prepared the clay as well as he could for permanent preservation and gave it to Colonel Colonel Col. Grant. Up to the present day, May 22, 1885, no later likeness of General General Gen. Grant Grant Grant, of any kind kind kind, has been made from life life life, and if this shall chance to remain the last ever made of him from life, coming generations can properly be grateful properly be grateful at least rest satisfied properly be grateful Redpath inserted ‘e’; SLC deleted the entire phrase and substituted a new one that one so nearly perfect of him was made after the world learned his name. his name. textual note: In the bottom margin of the TS page ending with these words SLC wrote and deleted ‘Depew’s speech’. Grant’s Memoirs 1885. (Spring.) Grant’s Memoirs 1885. (Spring.) flush left 1885. centered on the same line Grant’s Memoirs. flush right on the same line (Spring. double rule Some time after the contract for General Grant’s book was completed, I found that nothing but a verbal understanding existed between General Grant and the Century Company giving General Grant permission to use his Century articles in his book. There is a law of custom which gives an author the privilege of using his magazine article article articles in any way he pleases pleases pleases, after it shall have appeared in the magazine, magazine, magazine,; comma mended to a semicolon and this law of custom is so well established that an author never expects to have any difficulty about getting a magazine copyright transferred to him him him, whenever he shall ask for it it it, with the purpose in view of putting it in a book. But But But, in the present case case case, I was afraid that the Century Company might fall back upon their legal rights and ignore the law of custom, in which case we should be debarred from using General Grant’s Century articles in his book—an awkward state of things, because he was now too sick a man to re-write them. It was necessary that something should be done in this matter, and done at once. Mr. Seward, General Grant’s lawyer, was a good deal disturbed when he found that there was no writing. But I was not. I believed that the Century people could be relied upon to carry out any verbal agreement which they had made. The only thing I feared was that their idea of the verbal agreement agreement agreement, and General Grant’s idea of it it it, might not coincide. So I went back to the General’s house and got Colonel Fred Colonel Fred Col. Fred. Grant to write down what he understood the verbal agreement to be be be, and this piece of writing he read to General Grant, who said it was correct correct correct, and then signed it it it, with his own hand: a feeble and trembling signature, but recognizable as his. Then I sent sent wsent for Webster, Webster, Webster, and our lawyer, lawyer, lawyer, and we three went to the Century office, office, office, where we found Roswell Smith, (the head man of the company,) (the . . . company,) (the head man of the company,) Redpath inserted the comma and SLC inserted the parentheses and several of the editors. I stated my case plainly and simply simply simply, and found that their understanding understanding understanding, and General Grant’s Grant’s Grant’s, were identical; were identical; was identical: so, the difficulty was at an end at once, and we proceeded to draw a writing to cover the thing. When the business was finished, or, perhaps, in the course of it, I made another interesting discovery. I was already aware that the Century people were going to bring out bring out bring out all their war articles in book form form form, eventually, General Grant’s among the number; number; number; but but but, as I knew what a small price had been paid to the General for his articles articles articles, I had a vague general notion that he would receive a further payment for the use of them in their book, book, book,— a remuneration which an author customarily receives receives receives, in our day day day, by another unwritten law of custom. But when I spoke of this, to my astonishment they told me that they had bought and paid for every one of these war articles with the distinct understanding that that first payment was the last. In confirmation of this amazing circumstance, they brought out a receipt which General Grant had signed, and therein it distinctly appeared that each $500 not only paid for the use of the article printed in the magazine but also in the subsequent book! but . . . book! but . . . book.! period mended to an exclamation point; phrase underscored One thing was quite clear to me: if we consider the value of those articles to that book, we must grant that the General was paid very much less than nothing at all for their issue in the magazine. This was altogether the sharpest trade I have ever heard of, in any line of business, horse trading horse trading horse-trading included. The Century people didn’t blush and therefore blush and therefore blush, and, therefore, it is plain that they considered the transaction fair and legitimate; legitimate; legitimate: and I believe myself that they had no idea that they were doing an unfair thing. It was easily demonstrable that they were buying ten-dollar ten-dollar ten-thousand-dollar gold pieces from General Grant at twenty-five twenty-five twenty five cents apiece apiece apiece ‘a piece’ marked to join up , and I think it was as easily demonstrable that they did not know that there was anything unfair about it. During our talk talk talk, Roswell Roswell Rosewell Smith said to me, with the glad air of a man who has stuck a nail nail needle nail in his foot, “I’m glad you’ve got the General’s book, Mr. Clemens, and glad there was somebody with courage enough to take it it it, , under the circumstances. What do you think the General wanted to require of me?” “What?” “He wanted me to insure a sale of 25,000 sets of his book. I wouldn’t risk such a guarantee on any book that ever was published.” “He . . . 25,000 . . . published.” “He . . . twenty-five thousand . . . published.” ‘He . . . twenty-five thousand . . . published.’ underscored This is the remark I have already several times referred to. I’ve got Smith’s exact language; (from my note-book); it proves that they thought 10 per cent royalty would actually represent half profits on General Grant’s book! Imagine it. This . . . it. This . . . it. inserted vertically in the right margin I did not say anything, anything, anything, but I thought a good deal. This was one more evidence that the Century people had no more just idea of the value of the book than as many children might be expected to have. At this present writing (May 25, 1885) we have not advertised General Grant’s book in any way: we have not spent a dollar in advertising of any kind; kind; kind: we have not even given notice by circulars or otherwise that we are ready to receive applications from book agents, agents, agents,; comma mended to a semicolon and yet yet yet, to-day to-day to-day, we have bona fide orders for 100,000 sets of the book—that is to say, say, say, 200,000 single volumes, volumes, volumes,; comma mended to a semicolon and these orders are from men who have have are have bonded themselves to take and pay for them, and who have also laid before us the most trustworthy evidence that they are financially able to carry out their contracts. The territory which these men have taken is only about one-fourth one-fourth one fourth of the area of the Northern states. We have also under consideration applications for 50,000 sets more more more; and and and, although we have confidence in the energy and ability of the men who have made these applications, applications, applications, we have not closed with them because because because, as yet yet yet, we are not sufficiently satisfied as to as to of as to their financial strength. [Sept. 10; 250,000 sets (500,000 single copies,) have been sold, to date—and only half the ground canvassed.] [Sept. . . . canvassed.] [Sept . . . canvassed.] When it became known that the General’s book had fallen into my hands, the New York World and a Boston paper, (I think the Herald) came out at once with the news; news; news,; comma mended to a semicolon and, and, and, in both instances, instances, instances, the position was taken that, that, that, by some sort of superior under-handed smartness, smartness, smartness, I had taken an unfair advantage of the confiding simplicity of the Century people, people, people, and got the book away from them—a book which they had the right to consider their property, property, property, inasmuch as the terms of its publication had been mutually agreed upon, upon, upon, and the contract covering it was on the point of being signed by General Grant when I put in my meddling appearance. None of the statements of these two papers was correct, correct, correct, but the Boston paper’s account was considered to be necessarily correct, for the reason that it was furnished by the sister of Mr. Gilder, editor of the Century. So, there was considerable newspaper talk about my improper methods, methods, methods,; comma mended to a semicolon but nobody seemed to have wit enough to discover that if one gouger had had had ‘had’ underscored captured the General’s book, book, book here was evidence that he had only prevented another gouger from getting it, since the Century’s terms were distinctly mentioned in the Boston paper’s account as being 10 per cent royalty 10 per cent royalty ten per cent royalty ‘ten per cent royalty’ underscored . No party observed that, that, that, and nobody commented upon it. It was taken for granted all round that General Grant granted . . . Grant granted . . . Grant Redpath underscored ‘granted’ and ‘Grant’ and wrote an asterisk in the margin to call SLC’s attention to the wording; SLC deleted the asterisk and both underscores would have signed that 10 10 ten per cent contract without being grossly cheated. It is my settled policy to allow newspapers to make as many misstatements about me or my affairs as they like; like; like: therefore therefore therefore, I had no mind to contradict either of these newspapers newspapers newspapers; or explain my side of the case in any way. But a reporter came to our house at Hartford from Hartford from Hartford, (from one of the editors of the Courant Courant Courant,) to ask me for my side of the matter for use in the Associated Press dispatches. I dictated a short paragraph in which I said that the statement made in the World that there was a a any a coolness between the Century Company and General Grant, Grant, Grant, and that that that, in consequence of it it it, the Century would not publish any more articles by General General Gen. Grant, notwithstanding the fact that they had advertised them far and wide, wide, wide, was not true. I said there was no coolness and no ground for coolness; coolness; coolness: that the contract for the book had been open for all competitors; competitors; competitors: that I had put in my application and had asked the General to state its terms to the other applicants in order that he might thereby be enabled to get the best terms possible; possible; possible: that I had got the book eventually, book eventually, book, eventually, but by no underhand underhand underhanded or unfair method. The statement statement statement that I made was concise and brief brief brief, and contained nothing offensive. It was sent over the wires to the Associated Press headquarters headquarters head quarters in New York, but it was not issued issued issued ‘issued’ underscored by that concern. It did not appear in print. I inquired inquired enquired why, and was told that that that, although it was a piece of news of quite universal interest, interest, interest, it was also more or less of an advertisement for the book—a thing I had not thought of before. I was also told that if I had had a friend round about the Associated Press office, I could have had that thing published all over the country for a reasonable bribe. I wondered if that were true. I wondered if so great and important a concern dealt in that sort of thing. I presently got something in the way of a confirmation in New York. York. York, . Redpath inserted the comma and SLC replaced it with a period A few days afterwards, I found that our lawyers, Alexander & & and Green, and also Mr. Webster, had been disturbed by the World’s statement of this matter matter matter, and had thought a correction ought to be made through the press of the country. They had imagined that the Associated Press, having Press, having Press (having for its sole business the collection of valuable news for newspapers, newspapers, newspapers,) would be very glad to have a statement of the facts in this case. Therefore, they called on an employee of that concern and put into his hands a brief statement of the affair. He read it over, hesitated, said it was certainly a matter of great public interest but that he couldn’t see any way to make the statement without its being also a pretty good advertisement for General Grant’s book, and for my publishing firm; firm; firm; but he said if we would pay $500 he would send it over the wires to every newspaper in the country connected with that institution. This pleasant offer was declined. But the proposition seemed to explain to me a thing which had often puzzled me. That was the frequent appearance appearance appearance, among the Associated Press dispatches dispatches dispatches, of prodigious puffs of speculative schemes. One, in particular, was a new electric light company of Boston. During a number of weeks there had been almost daily a wildly extravagant puff of this company’s prosperous condition in the Associated Press dispatches of the Hartford papers. The papers. The papers.— The prosperity or the unprosperity of that company was a matter of not the slightest interest to the generality of newspaper readers, and I had always wondered before why the Associated Press people should take such an apparent interest in the matter. It seemed quite satisfactorily explained now. The Associated Press had sent the World’s misstatements over the wires wires wires, to all parts of the country country country, free of charge charge charge; for the reason, no doubt, that that statement slandered General Grant, Grant, Grant, lied about his son, dealt the Century Company a disastrous disastrous and disastrous Redpath left space for a word before ‘and’ but SLC did not insert an adjective blow, and was thoroughly well calculated to sharply injure me in both character and pocket. Therefore it was apparent that the Associated Press were willing to destroy a man for nothing, but required cash for rehabilitating him again. That was Associated Press morals. It was newspaper morals, too. Speaking in general terms terms terms, it was always easy to get any print to say any injurious thing about a citizen in a newspaper, newspaper, newspaper, but it was next to impossible to get that paper or any other to right an injured man. We have a law of libel, but it is inoperative and merely cumbers the statute books. For several reasons: First—The case must take its routine place in the calendar calendar callender of the court and that ensures that some months must elapse before the courts get down to it, so that whatever injury the libel might do has been already already already been done. done. done: Second Second Second —A jury is afraid of the newspapers and always lets a newspaper off off up off at the cheapest and easiest rate. As the result result result, libel suits are very uncommon and uncommon and uncommon, and, whenever one is tried tried tried, it simply serves as a reminder to later comers that the best way is to let libel suits alone and take what the newspapers choose to give you in the way of abuse. abuse. abuse. To be followed by Duncan’s libel suit. See two pages of newspaper statements about Grant’s book and the Century people and Mark Twain affixed. Gen Grant, Mark Twain and the Century.—The story of Gen Grant’s last days includes yet another disagreeable episode, according to the New York correspondent of the Boston Herald. It has been generally understood that Grant’s papers on the war in the Century magazine have been chapters from the autobiography which he is preparing, and that they were to be followed by other chapters; and it now seems that it was all but concluded that the Century company should publish the book. Arrangements, says this correspondent, were made for the printing of the volumes and the making of the pictures, and terms nearly settled, on the basis of a royalty, when in stepped Mark Twain and spoiled it all. It is stated by this writer that Mr Clemens is the principal partner in the subscription book firm of Charles L. Webster & Co, which publishes his own books, and that Webster & Co made a proposition to Gen Grant to take his son Jesse into the enterprise of publishing and circulating the autobiography, showing the general that he could get a clean profit treble the royalty offered by the Century company. The consequence is represented to be that no more of Gen Grant’s work will appear in the magazine, and it is intimated that Mark Twain cannot have any more of his “Huckleberry Finn” “Huckleberry Finn” “Huckle-‘berry Finn” literature published hereafter in those offended pages. The readers of the magazine may well hope the last item of this news is true. “Brunswick,” the Boston Saturday Gazette correspondent from New York, who is Miss Jeannette L. Gilder, sister of the editor of the Century, and, therefore, ought to know—gives a somewhat different account, saying:— The terms offered Gen Grant, by Mr Webster, are the same, I believe, as those offered by the Century company—10 per cent on the retail price. But Mr Webster’s contract includes one of the young Grants, which makes it more attractive to the general. The Century company would probably have published the Grant autobiography if it had not been for the “son” clause; but that put a new aspect on the thing, and while it was perfectly natural for Gen Grant to want to see his son fixed in business, it was not so natural for the Century company to want to be forced into a bargain of this sort. The relations between Gen Grant and the Century people are still perfectly friendly, and it may be that, after all, they will publish the book. Springfield Republican March 9, 1885 Springfield Republican March 9, 1885 Springfield Republican March 9 – 85 written by Redpath below the pasted-up newspaper clipping GRANT AND HIS MEMOIRS. why an advertised article did not appear in the “century.” A Brilliant Business Scheme by Which Mark Twain Takes Jesse Grant for a Partner and Becomes the Publisher of the Forthcoming Work. The March number of the Century appeared without the promised and much-advertised article from the pen of Gen. Grant on one of the great battles of the civil war. The fact caused much comment in literary circles, and in some quarters it was thought that the absence of the article was due to the General’s serious illness. Better informed people, however, have known that nearly all, if not all, the papers of the series had been prepared before the first appeared. It has just leaked out that Gen. Grant and the Century Company have had a “falling out” and it is not likely that any further papers from the General will appear in the Century. Gen. Grant is preparing an autobiography and it was all but concluded that the book would be published by the Century Company. He was paid $1,000 for the article on “Shiloh,” which appeared in the February number. The managers expected that chapters from the autobiography would first appear in their magazine and that the volumes would bear their imprint. Negotiations were in progress in regard to the illustrations and the printing of the volumes, and terms between Gen. Grant and the company had almost been concluded on the basis of a royalty. The contract, however, had not yet been signed when Mark Twain appeared upon the scene with more advantageous terms than the Century Company offered. Mark Twain, besides being a rollicking humorist, is a smart business man, and it is said that in recent years he has not shared the profits of his fun with any one. He has mastered the art of selling books by subscription, and, moreover, is the principal in the firm of Charles L. Webster & Co. Mr. Webster is a relative, and his duties are mainly to look after the regiments of agents who go about the country soliciting customers for any literary novelties that the firm may have to offer. The story goes that Mr. Webster, acting for Mark Twain, proposed to Gen. Grant to take his son Jesse, who travelled with him during a part of his famous trip around the world, into the firm as partner. This proposition was regarded favorably, and then it was suggested that the firm would publish and circulate the General’s autobiography. Mr. Webster told the General that the mechanical cost of producing each $2 volume would not exceed 30 cents, and that if large editions were sold, as was sure to be the case, the profits would be three times larger than the royalty offered by the Century Company. Gen. Grant accepted the offer not only because his profits would be larger but because also it would make a business for his son, who was almost “cleaned out” by the failure of Grant & Ward. A representative of the Century Company when questioned about the matter said that a contract had not been completed for the publication of Gen. Grant’s reminiscences, but it had been considered almost settled that the book would be issued by the company. The General visited the office almost daily, when able to go about, to consult about the material and make-up of the book and the advice given was generally followed. “We have no grievance,” continued the Century’s representative. “Gen. Grant had the right to go elsewhere, his main object being to create a place for his son. We were not prepared to do that.” It is said, however, that the Century people feel exceedingly “sore” about the matter, and it is doubtful if any more of Gen. Grant’s papers will appear in the magazine. It is not likely that any passages from the forthcoming book will appear in it in advance, either. N. Y. World N. Y. World N. Y. World written by Redpath below the pasted-up newspaper clipping THE GENERAL’S LITERARY WORK. four articles for “the century”—his memoirs to fill two subscription volumes. Many curious and anxious eyes ran over the columns of The Century for March expecting to find therein another paper from the pen of General Grant. The impression had gone forth that the article on Shiloh which appeared in the February number was the first of a series that were to be published regularly every month and when the March number was issued without containing the expected paper speculation was rife as to its cause. Some attributed the omission to the General’s ill health; others to the fact that he was more anxious that his more important memoirs should be first completed; but it was left for The World to discover the fact that there had been a “falling out” between the publishers of The Century and General Grant and that it was not likely that any more of his papers would be published in the magazine. The cause of the falling-out was said to be that General Grant had taken the publication of his memoirs away from The Century and had entered into a contract for their publication by Charles L. Webster & Co., because The Century could not find a place for Jesse Grant in any of its departments. The facts are that General Grant stipulated some time ago to write for The Century four papers on the War, and the following subjects were selected: Shiloh, Vicksburg, Chattanooga, and the Wilderness Campaign. As soon as the terms were agreed upon the General entered upon his literary work with characteristic energy, working frequently from eight to ten hours hours hour a day: and though he was hampered by the insidious disease that is now sapping his vitality, only a comparatively short interval elapsed from the time he began his labors when the papers on Shiloh, Vicksburg and Chattanooga were completed and handed over to The Century. They were paid for in accordance with the agreement, and are now in the possession of The Century. The manuscript for “The Wilderness Campaign” is completed and is now being revised by the General as rapidly as his health and other duties will permit. There has been no falling-out between General Grant and The Century, and their relations are in every way cordial and pleasant. The Century Publishing Company entered into competition for the publication of General Grant’s books and its failure to obtain the contract was simply a business incident, the General being better satisfied with the arrangements made with Webster & Co. In the negotiation for the publication of the book the question of giving his son a position was not a matter of consideration. The contract between Webster & Co. and General Grant was signed on February 28, and it is denied at the publishers’ office that taking Jesse Grant into partnership, as The World alleged, had anything to do with awarding them the contract, for the reason that such an arrangement has not been made. Samuel L. Clemens (Mark Twain) is a silent partner in the firm of Webster & Co., but entrusts the management of the business to his nephew, Charles L. Webster, who conducted all the negotiations with General Grant. The book is to be complete in two volumes. The manuscript for the first is completed and will be delivered to Mr. Webster, the latter part of this week. The General is working as much as possible on the materials for the second second seecond volume, which is also nearly finished, the principal labor now being that of revision. The book will be sold by subscription, and the price will probably be $3 50 a volume. It is expected that the two volumes will be ready for delivery in October or November. N. Y. Tribune N. Y. Tribune N. Y. Tribune written by Redpath below the pasted-up newspaper clipping GEN. GRANT AND HIS BOOK. Over 100,000 Orders for the Set Received by His Publishers. Gen. Grant has done much towards completing his book during his period of convalescence and expects to finish it within the next few days. The first volume is written and revised. Only about one hundred pages are needed to complete the second, though only a portion of it has been revised. The story of Lee’s surrender was finished on Monday and revised yesterday. The General’s connection with Lincoln’s assassination has been related. It is his intention to begin work to-day on a description of the grand review of the Federal armies in Washington at the close of the war. He writes little himself, but dictates to a stenographer. Not only is his mind clear, but the story as he dictates it is lucid and requires but little revision. His daily average is about thirty pages and the work apparently fatigues him little, if any. The title of the book is “The Personal Memoirs of U. S. Grant.” It tells the story of his life from childhood down to the grand review. It is replete with interesting sketches and anecdote of Lincoln and other great men, with whom Gen. Grant came in contact in civil and military life. Each volume will contain about 500 pages with numerous illustrations and maps. Charles L. Webster & Co., of this city, are the publishers. The work will be published simultaneously by them in the United States, England, France, Germany and Canada. Mr. Webster will go abroad in July to arrange for translating and publishing it in foreign countries. The first volume will be issued Dec. 1, and the second about March 1, 1886. Already orders for over 100,000 sets of the “Memoirs” have been received without solicitation or advertising. At least 50,000 additional orders have come in which have not yet been accepted. It is expected that the sales will be unprecedentedly large. If nothing unforeseen happens the publishers expect to have all the manuscript in hand inside of a month. It will require but a few days to finish the second volume, after which it will be leisurely revised. Nearly all of volume II. has been written since the General was confined to the house by his present illness. Gen. Grant yesterday sent the following letter to his publishers: New York, May 2, 1885. To Charles L. Webster & Co. Dear Sirs: My attention has been called to a paragraph in a letter published in The World newspaper of this city of Wednesday, April 29, of which the following is a part: “The work upon his new book, about which so much has been said, is the work of Gen. Adam Badeau. Gen. Grant, I have no doubt, has furnished all of the material and all of the ideas in the memoirs as far as they have been prepared, but Badeau has done the work of composition. The most that Gen. Grant has done upon this book has been to prepare the rough notes and memoranda for its various chapters.” chapters.” chapters.’ ” I will divide this into four parts and answer each of them. First—“The work upon his new book, about which so much has been said, is the work of Gen. Adam Badeau.” This is false. The composition is entirely my own. Second—“Gen. Grant, I have no doubt, has furnished all of the material and all of the ideas in the memoirs as far as they have been prepared.” This is true. Third—“But Badeau has done the work of composition.” The composition is entirely my own. Fourth—“The most that Gen. Grant has done upon this book has been to prepare the rough notes and memoranda for its various chapters.” This is false. I have not only prepared myself whatever rough notes were made, but, as above stated, have done the entire work of composition and preparing notes, and no one but myself has ever used one of such notes in any composition. You may take such measures as you see fit to correct this report, which places me in the attitude of claiming the authorship of a book which I did not write, and is also injurious to you who are publishing and advertising such book as my work. Yours truly, U. S. Grant. N. Y. World N. Y. World N Y World written by Redpath below the pasted-up newspaper clipping