27 March 1907 Wednesday, March 27, 1907 Mr. Clemens’s experience with his copper copper Copper stock as advised by Mr. Rogers; his determination to exploit his stocks and bonds according to his own intuitions—Pecuniarily the last twelvemonth would have been more profitable than 1902 if he had acted on his own inspirations—Mr. Clemens buys a hundred a hundred 100 shares of wireless telephone wireless telephone Wireless Telephone stock. I wish to go on for a while cataloguing the things which have happened to me recently, for I find it very interesting to note how important each of them was in its turn, and how quickly it dropped to the rear and became of no consequence. I note one circumstance with high gratification, and that is this: that whereas Mr. Rogers’s fiscal knowledge is better than mine, my fiscal ignorance is better than his fiscal knowledge, every now and then, and that whereas his caution is better than mine, my destitution of it is worth six of it. For instance: a year and a half ago, when he told me to buy that copper stock which I have been talking about, and said that the price would be certain to advance, I wanted to take two thousand shares, which would cost eighty-six thousand dollars, and would come near to exhausting my bank-balance. He said no, take the half of it. To my mind this was not good reasoning. If the price was sure to advance, why shouldn’t one buy all of that stock that he could pay for? However, I respected his judgment, and I took a thousand shares instead of two thousand. I took it at 43; 50 was par. It was a 6 per cent 6 per cent six per cent. stock and would soon pay 8 8 eight . Copper was more precious than gold, and not all the mines in the world could supply the demand. I kept the thousand shares nine months; I collected one 8 per cent 8 per cent eight per cent. dividend and one 10 per cent 10 per cent ten per cent. dividend; then the market price had climbed to 79. I thought I would sell out. Thirty-two thousand dollars’ dollars’ dollars profit on an investment of forty-three thousand, all in nine months, with four or five thousand in dividends added, seemed to me good enough for so humble a financier as I; but no, Mr. Rogers said, “Sell half; you “Sell half; you “sell half;. Yyou period mended to a semicolon couldn’t possibly have anything better than that stock. Sell half, keep the rest.” rest.” rest.” I obeyed. By luck, I had bought at the lowest figure; by luck again I sold at the highest figure—79 ¾. As soon as I withdrew my support from that excellent stock it began to drop along down, a point at a time, until two or three months ago, when it seemed to have reached the low water mark at 58. I consulted consulted consulted with Mr. Rogers, and he said yes, buy. I thought of taking the whole mine, but again he was conservative; again he was cautious. He said, “take “take “take what you can pay for and no more, and leave as much money in the bank as you take out of it.” it.” it.” So I took a thousand shares at 58. I still had five hundred at 43, and so the average cost of the whole was 53. I made up my mind to sell those fifteen hundred shares sure if the price ever reached 79 again. It did reach that figure, but, as I have already explained in an earlier chapter, explained in an earlier chapter, explained, in an earlier chapter, I was asleep at the time and failed to secure the forty thousand dollars due me on my judgment. As I have said, the stock began to soar along down until it struck bottom day before yesterday, when I bought bought got bought two hundred and fifty shares at 53, and of course by this maneuver I sent it up. It went up because I wanted to buy another two hundred and fifty, but I was proposing to pay less for it. Yesterday afternoon it had gone up five points and a half. I seem to be one of the most formidable persons in the financiering business, for I can’t sell without sending the stock down, and I can’t buy without sending it up. By my count, my pocket is much damaged through Mr. Rogers’s expert judgment. I estimate that if I had bought and sold every time that I proposed to buy and sell, I should now have a profit of ninety thousand dollars in the bank, whereas, my intentions being defeated by Mr. Rogers’s superior judgment, that money failed to arrive at the bank—and yet I do not see but that I get as much satisfaction out of it as anybody could get out of ninety thousand dollars that he didn’t own, for I have already in fancy spent it several times, and have gotten very real pleasure out of spending it; also I allow myself luxuries which I could not afford at all if I didn’t have that imaginary ninety thousand to draw upon. I am so pleased with my financial superiorities over Mr. Rogers’s that I am resolved to exploit them now and see what will come of it. Within a week this temporary panic will be over, and the sound and safe dividend-paying stocks will be up again; then I shall sell my hoard, both stocks and bonds, that I have been holding these six or seven years; and I mean to put the money in the bank and leave it there at 3 per cent 3 per cent three per cent. until the next flurry comes, even if it be six months that I must wait. Many a time, in these six or seven years, each stock that I own has gone up ten or twenty points above what I paid for it, and later each of them has gone ten points or more below what I paid for it. Hereafter Hereafter Hereafter I mean to sell them out at normal rates, then buy them back and sell them again, and keep this game going. I cannot hurt myself, because if they get left on my hands some time or other, no harm will be done, because their dividends will continue, and not fail. Pecuniarily, this last twelvemonth would have been more profitable to me than was the year 1902, if I had acted upon my fine inspirations and let Mr. Rogers’s educated judgment alone, for the royalties on my old books have paid me forty thousand dollars, which is about eight thousand more than they have been in the annual annual annual habit of paying; also the North American Review is paying me thirty thousand for a hundred thousand words of my Autobiography; indeed I should have beaten 1902 considerably but for the miscarriage of that ninety thousand dollars. There is a new invention. Apparently it is a wireless telephone. Everybody can have the machine in his house, and it has one or two advantages over the telephone that uses a wire. For instance: it records the messages which it receives, and it is able to do this when no one is present; therefore you can call up a friend, deliver your message into his house with none to receive it but the machine; when he returns home he can reverse the spool and listen to the message; also it keeps its secrets; they do not pass through a central station to be listened to by the telephone girl and distributed abroad. Some of the Company’s circulars and other advertisements reached me yesterday by mail. I found that I could get a hundred shares of the stock at ten dollars a share, if I wanted it, but that I was not privileged to take any more than that. That has a suspicious look; it looks like fishing for widows and orphans, and the clergy. You can float any speculation that is inventable if you offer its stock at ten dollars a share, with a prediction that it will later sell for a million; then you get all the widows and orphans and clergymen that are floating around. They will pledge their very children and their Bibles to raise money enough to buy. However, I am no better, myself, than a widow, or an orphan, or a clergyman, when it comes to a chance for a clear, straight, unmitigated and inexcusable gamble; I always want to take a hand in that. Instantly I wanted a hundred of those shares; then I thought, no, I should have to conceal the matter from Mr. Rogers; then, later, I could not keep my secret; I should be sure to reveal it to him, and then there would be sarcasms. However, at this point in my reflections I picked up one of the advertisements which had thitherto escaped me. It was a facsimiled letter from a man of high fame in science, and of acknowledged and unassailable probity. In this letter he asked for a hundred shares, and said that he wanted to use them in rectification of a mistake which he made twenty-eight years ago when twenty-five hundred shares of Bell Telephone stock were offered to him for five hundred dollars and he didn’t take them. Dear me, I knew how that poor wise ass was feeling! His wail brought back to me my own experience of twenty-nine years ago with Bell Telephone stock—an experience which I have already recorded, with many pangs, in one of the early chapters of this Autobiography. He remarked in his letter that if he had taken the twenty-five hundred shares it would have paid him twenty million dollars before this. It hurt me to the marrow to hear this man go into these quite unnecessary particulars, for it called back to my memory, out of that distant past, how in 1877 or ’78 I had twenty-three thousand dollars in my pocket which I had no particular use for, and the Bell Telephone people tried to trade me a couple of tons of stock for it. I was fully as wise as this other smarty, and they did not succeed; but if they had succeeded I would pay off our national debt now, and let the country take a fresh start. Upon reflection, I sent a thousand dollars this morning and captured a hundred shares of this gamble. I was not going to be caught out again. I shall not live live have live to pay the national debt, but in my dying moments I shall instruct Clara and Jean to attend to it.