26 July 1907 Dictated Friday, July 26, 1907 Paragraph copied from “England’s Ovation to Mark Twain” by Sydney Brooks, in regard to Mr. Clemens’s speech at the Pilgrims’ dinner—Speeches can be conveyed in print, but talks cannot—The ceremony of conferring the degree of D. Litt., and copy of Sydney Brooks’s account of it. The fine verses quoted in that account are from the hand of Owen Seaman, of the Punch editorial staff. It sounds that same deep note of affection, which I so prize. In In In Dictated July 26, 1907. In [Dictated July 26, 1907.] In an article entitled “England’s Ovation to Mark Twain” Twain” Twain” Twain,” Sydney Brooks Brooks Brooks Brooks—but never mind that, now. Brooks—but never mind that, now. has a paragraph which calls to mind a chapter of this Autobiography which I dictated a couple of years ago when Clara made her début début deébut accent added on the concert stage at Norfolk, Connecticut, and I made a talk—not a speech. This is the quotation: It would have done you good to hear the storm of cheers that greeted Mark Twain when he rose rose rose, cigar in mouth, rose, cigar in mouth, to respond. His first words had reference to two telegrams of greeting, one from the undergraduates of Oxford, the other from the New York New York American New York Pilgrims. I was never more conscious of the difference between the spoken and the written word than in reading over in print the speech which I heard Mark Twain deliver. You get indeed the words, but the atmosphere of the occasion that made each point so inevitably appropriate and telling, the presence and gestures of the veteran speaker, his incomparably effective and dramatic drawl—all this you miss. It is as I have said in the autobiographical chapter just referred to: speeches speeches speeches ‘speeches’ underscored can be conveyed in print, but not talks talks talks ‘talks’ underscored . Speeches consist of literarily phrased and completed sentences, and they read smoothly and intelligibly, but this is not the case with talks. The soul of a talk consists of action, not words; action, gesture, inflection—the unvoiced expression of the thought. These felicities escape the stenographer; they are an aroma; he cannot concrete them into words; the words are not there; none but the inconsequential sentences are completed; the happy ones break off in the middle because the audience has got the point, it is not necessary to finish the sentence, and the house would not hear the finish anyhow. But the stenographer cannot leave the sentences in that broken condition, for the result would be ragged, incoherent and incomprehensible; therefore he finishes the broken sentences with words of his own, and the result is stupendously unhappy. A talk cannot be conveyed in print successfully; there is no way to do it, and the attempt should never be made. Oh look at that Pilgrim talk of mine! It was an exceedingly good talk when it was uttered, but how flat it is in print! I was I was I was Dictated at Home, July 26, 1907. row of four stars inserted I was in Oxford by seven o’clock that evening (June 25, 1907), and (June 25, 1907), and and and (June 25, 1907), and (June 25, 1907), and trying on the scarlet gown which the tailor had been constructing, and found it right—right and surpassingly becoming. At half past half past half-past half past ten the next morning we assembled at All Souls College and marched thence, gowned, mortar-boarded, mortar-boarded, mortar-boarded, mortar-boarded and in double file, down a long street to the Sheldonian Theatre, between solid walls of the populace, very much hurrah’d hurrah’d cheered cheered hurrah’d hurrah’d and limitlessly kodacked. We made a procession of considerable length and distinction and picturesqueness, with the Chancellor, Lord Curzon, late Viceroy of India, in his rich robe of black and gold, in the lead, followed by a pair of trim little-boy trim little-boy little trim little-boy trim little boy train-bearers, and the train-bearers followed by the young Prince Arthur of Connaught, who was to be made a D.C.L. The detachment of D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s were followed by the Doctors of Science, and these by the Doctors of Literature, and these in turn by the Doctors Doctors Doctors of Science and Doctors of Music. Sidney Colvin marched in front of me; I was coupled with Sidney Lee, and Kipling followed us; General Booth, of the Salvation Army, was in the squadron of D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s D.C.L’s D.C.L.’s . Our journey ended, we were halted in a fine old hall whence we could see, through a corridor of some length, the massed audience in the theatre. Here for a little time we moved about and chatted and made acquaintanceships; then the D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s were summoned, and they marched through that corridor and the shouting began in the theatre. It would be some time before the Doctors of Literature and of Science would be called for, because each of those D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s D.C.L.’s had to have a couple of Latin speeches made over him before his promotion would be complete—one by the Regius Professor of Civil Law, the other by the Chancellor. After a while I asked Sir William Ramsay Ramsay Ramsey Ramseay Ramsay if a person might smoke here and not get shot. He said said said said, said, “Yes,” but that that that that whoever did it and got caught would be fined a guinea, and perhaps hanged later. He said he knew of a place where we could accomplish at least as much as half of a smoke before any informers would be likely to chance upon us, and he was ready to show the way to any who might be willing to risk the guinea and the hanging. By request he led the way, and Kipling, Sir Norman Lockyer and I followed. We crossed an unpopulated quadrangle and stood under one of its exits—an archway of massive masonry—and there we lit up and began to take comfort. The photographers soon arrived, but they were courteous and friendly and gave us gave us made gave us gave us no trouble, and we gave them none. They grouped us in all sorts of ways and photographed us at their diligent leisure, while we smoked and talked. We were there more than an hour; then we returned to headquarters, happy, content, and greatly refreshed. Presently we filed into the theatre, under a very satisfactory hurrah, and waited in a crimson column, dividing the crowded pit through the middle, until each of us in his turn should be called to stand before the Chancellor and hear hear listen to hear our merits set forth in sonorous Latin. Meantime, Kipling and I wrote autographs until some good kind soul interfered in our behalf and procured for us a rest. I will now save what is left of my modesty by quoting again again again a paragraph from Sydney Brooks’s “Ovation.” On Wednesday On Wednesday On the following day, Wednesday On Wednesday , June 26, he received his degree of D. Litt. He was not the only American so honored. Mr. Whitelaw Reid was also present, the degree awarded him being the D.C.L.; and it is pleasant to be able to record that his reception was one of unforced heartiness and cordiality. The Oxford degrees are conferred in the Sheldonian Theatre, a circular building, built by Sir Christopher Wren after a Roman model, and though apparently small, capable of holding nearly four thousand people. On Wednesday all the tiers and galleries were filled to the uttermost, the lower ones by ladies and dons, the topmost ones by undergraduates, while on the floor stood the graduates and strangers, clustering round a passageway through which the procession was to pass. Shortly after eleven o’clock the Chancellor, Lord Curzon, in his black and gold state robes, attended by two pages, and followed by the heads of the colleges in their scarlet gowns, entered the theatre and passed up to the platform. The list of proposed degrees was at once read out by the Chancellor and the pleasure of the house asked in the time-honored Latin form. The mightiest bursts of applause were for the Prime Minister, the American ambassador, “General” Booth, Sir Evelyn Wood, Mark Twain, and Mr. Rudyard Kipling. Those on whom the degree of Doctor of Civil Law was to be conferred were then summoned into the theatre and took their seats in the reserved passageway. One by one they were presented to the Chancellor by the Regius Professor of Civil Law in a series of Latin speeches describing their achievements. The Chancellor replied in a few complimentary words that often concealed a shrewd pleasantry and formally admitted each nominee to the degree. The person so honored then mounted the platform, shook hands with the Chancellor, and took his appointed seat to the right or left. When Mr. Whitelaw Reid’s turn came round the Regius Professor of Civil Law hailed him as the distinguished son of a kindred race, famous for his eloquence and a marked journalist, whose worth and repute among his own countrymen were attested by their choice of him to represent them as Ambassador to Great Britain. But it was not only as a kinsman and an Ambassador that they greeted him, but as a man of learning and proficiency in all the arts. While this greeting was being declaimed in sonorous Latin an undergraduate voice from the gallery, affecting what passes in England for an American accent of the worst buzz-saw character, shouted out, to the huge merriment of all present, “I guess that’s about right, pardner.” Mr. Reid was most warmly cheered as the Chancellor, after addressing him him him hism as vir honorate, magni populi legate, litteras diurnas magno labore multos annos molite, ingens inter consanguineas gentes amicitiae amicitiae amiciliae aut simultatis momentum, pronounced the words admitting him to the degree of civil law and shook him cordially by the hand. But unquestionably it was Mark Twain who of all the recipients of degrees roused the greatest enthusiasm. The whole building broke into a roar of applause when he stood up to be presented to the Chancellor. “What have you done with the Ascot Cup, Mark?” asked a voice from the gallery, and the assembly shook with laughter. “Have you got that jumping frog with you, Mark?” asked another voice, and peal upon peal of cheers rang out. The speech in which Mark Twain was presented was perfectly inaudible, but the professor who delivered it, being somewhat bald, and standing within a foot or two of Mark Twain’s magnificent mane, gave point to the coaxing query that floated down from the galleries, “Couldn’t you spare him some of your hair, Mark?” I doubt whether Mark Twain has ever been more severely tried than as he stood there, condemned by all the proprieties to silence and a more or less passive demeanor, while the jests flew fast and all the spectators shook with laughter and applause. A tremendous and most moving ovation punctuated the Chancellor’s address. Vir jucundissime [loud cheers] [loud cheers] [louder cheers] (loud cheers) ([loud cheers)] , lepidissime [louder cheers] [louder cheers] [loud cheers] (louder cheers) ([louder cheers)] , facetissime [frantic cheers] [frantic cheers] [frantic cheers] (frantic cheers) ([frantic cheers)] , qui totius orbis terrarum latera nativa tua hilaritate concutis [prolonged cheers] [prolonged cheers] [prolonged cheers] (prolonged cheers) ([prolonged cheers)] , during which Mark Twain advances to the Chancellor’s rostrum, shakes hands, and passes to a seat on the left, smiling and gratified except for the thought of all the good things he might have said in reply. And it was the same wherever he went in Oxford. When the presentations were over and the newly made Doctors filed out of the theatre and went to lunch at All Souls College, the people in the streets singled out Mark Twain, formed a vast and cheering body-guard around him and escorted him to the college gates. But before and after the lunch it was Mark Twain again, whom everybody seemed most of all to want to meet. The Maharajah of Bikanir, for instance, finding himself seated at lunch next to Mrs. Riggs (Kate Douglas Wiggin) and hearing that she knew Mark Twain, asked her to present him—a ceremony duly performed later on in the quadrangle. At the garden party given the same afternoon in the beautiful grounds of St. John’s, where the indefatigable Mark put in an appearance, it was just the same—every one pressed forward for an exchange of greetings and a hand-shake. On the following day, when the Oxford Pageant took place, it was even more so. “Mark Twain’s Pageant” it was called by one of the papers. Wherever he went he received from the people of Oxford the warm affectionate welcome that greeted him in London, and that will continue to greet him in every town he visits in these islands. islands. islands. islands. [¶] Siydney Brooks has done it well. It makes me proud to read it; as proud as I was in that old day, 62 years ago, when Dr. Cunningham saved me and disappointed our the village when I lay dying,—the centre of attraction,—with one judicious eye piously closed upon the fleeting vanities of this life, —an excellent effect— and the other open a crack to observe the tears, the sorrow, the admiration—all for me!—all for me! [¶] Ah, that was the proudest moment of my long life—until Oxford! ‘62’ circled by Munro row of six stars [¶] Let those stars take the place of it for the present. Sydney Brooks has done it well. It makes me proud to read it; as proud as I was in that old day, sixty-two years ago, when I lay dying, the centre of attraction, with one eye piously closed upon the fleeting vanities of this life—an excellent effect—and the other open a crack to observe the tears, the sorrow, the admiration—all for me—all for me! [¶] Ah, that was the proudest moment of my long life—until Oxford! row of six stars