16 December 1908 Dictated at Stormfield, December 16 December 16 Dec. 16th , 1908 I passed my seventy-third birthday a couple of weeks ago and the usual annual congratulations and condolences have followed by mail and telegraph. This time the unusual has happened; a letter has come to me from a once intimate friend whom I have not seen for forty-five forty-five 45 or fifty fifty 50 years,—Howard P. Taylor. My Dear Sam: My Dear Sam: Dec. 1, 1908. My Dear Sam: My Dear Sam: I read in a ’Frisco paper yesterday that you had just celebrated your 73d birthday. Let your old friend of nearly 50 years ago throw a few congratulations over your old pompadour, with the fervent hope you may live to celebrate many more annuals, and continue to entertain the world with your pleasantries pleasantries pestilential pleasantries pleasantries . I am but three years your junior, but feel fourteen years your senior, owing to a bunch of ingrowing rheumatism that has claimed most of my system since my advent among the “glorious fogs of California” shortly after the earthquake, and left me physically and financially “pinched” on a bargain-day mattress in in inn in Oakland, with a second-hand typewriter for company. I have read, too, of your frequent illnesses, and can only wonder at your extraordinary vitality, for when we were doing time on the old Enterprise in Virginia, Virginia, Virginia, Virginia you didn’t seem “bigger than a paragraph,” nor stalwart enough to pry up a carpet tack. I don’t know your attitude on religion, or whether you ever had any (few of us had in the old days), but doubtless you are thankful to the Great Unseen for the blessed energies He has given you, for prolonging your days, and for making you the creature of cheerful usefulness to the world. It saddens “we old ’uns,” though, to know that so few of our comrades of the past remain. A new, and still newer, generation has sprung up, and only a bent form and wrinkled face from among our youthful friends is occasionally seen wandering listlessly along along along among the streets streets streets street of San Francisco and Oakland. It makes one feel like the proverbial cat in the strange garret. Nearly all the old newspaper editors, reporters and compositors that we knew have passed to the beyond, except Joe except Joe except Joe except for Joe Goodman, whom I have been unable to locate, but hear he is somewhere somewhere somewher somewhere in Southern California. Jim Townsend, I am told, died a year or two ago at Lodi, Cal., and Jim Gillis passed out last year—Dan year—Dan year—Steve a few years previously. Dan year.—Dan de Quille some time ago, as you know. Denis and Jack McCarthy, Pit Taylor, Jack McGinn, Mike McCarthy, George Thurston, and other of the old office boys, have all been gathered in, leaving but few few few a few of the old Comstockers to face the inevitable. My brother Billy, whom I believe you knew knew knew know , is still on earth, here with me, but a paralytic. He is 76 years old. All very saddening; yet the retrospect is not so unpleasant, as I ponder over it, and doubtless the sanctities sanctities sancities sanctities are still slumbering within both of us that make this life worth the living. I am more than rejoiced to know that you are still on fair terms with your health. We health. We health, that you have a plenitude of this world’s goods, and that your declining years have been made comfortable and free from the garrulous commands of the modern landlady!—though I know you have had some pretty big ups and downs. We health. We are both left for a purpose, doubtless—yet yours has been at least partially accomplished in the pleasureable pleasureable pleasureable pleasurable food you have furnished the world—while mine is still a speck on the disk of uncertainty, the difference being that you understood yourself—I didn’t. didn’t. didn’t torn page didn’t. Let me again congratulate you. you. you, and wish you many years of healthful life; and if the spirit should move you, no one would be better pleased to receive a line from the old familiar pencil than Your croney of Land Syne, H. P. Taylor handprinted signature you. The letter makes me seem older than I am accustomed to feel because of the list of names it has dug up out of so remote a past. We were all young fellows then and there were twenty-six twenty-six 26 of us in the Virginia Enterprise Enterprise Enterprise office, a most gay and cheerful and noisy lot. The paper went to press press Press at two in the morning, then all the staff and all the compositors gathered themselves together in the composing-room composing-room composing room , and drank beer and sang the popular war songs of the day until dawn. When I look back now, they do seem preposterously young, those boys; and now when I read what Taylor has said about the remnant of them in his letter they seem as preposterously and impossibly old. No doubt the great majority of them are in the cemetery long ago, and I suppose the rest of us will join them before long. Speaking for myself I am willing; in fact I believe I have been willing ever since I was eighteen years old; not urgent, but willing, merely willing. Howard Taylor was a Southerner, with the pleasant South-twang in his speech; he was a handsome young fellow and graceful and full of life and jollity and good-nature good-nature goodnature and I think he had the blackest hair I have ever seen on the head of a person not an Indian. It is probably white enough now. He was foreman of the composing-room composing-room composing room , and I suppose he was the inventor of a word which I have often used in my books when I was talking about poor literary stuff that had a good opinion of itself—when I was talking about it disparagingly and wanted to compress my disparagement into a single word. I was city editor city editor City Editor and my duties kept me scribbling after the rest of the staff had finished theirs. Taylor used to come in and sit down near me and remark that the public were standing in ranks reaching from our front door to China and the rest of the corners of the earth waiting for my stuff, in fact crying for it and not willing to go to their beds until they got it. Presently he would take up a sheet of my manuscript, run his eye along down it, and then languidly ask: “Aren’t you nearly done? Don’t you think this is enough hog-wash for to-day?” A very good word. He never had any other name for my literature. Ten years ago, in London, Poultney A. Bigelow came to our house and said that an old, old and very affectionate friend of mine was living in handsome quarters at the West End and wanted me to come and dine with him and swap ancient reminiscences—name of the friend Howard P. Taylor. I was electrified with joy. When Poultney and I arrived at the place, we entered an English lift of that day and generation—a lift which held the two of us and the lift boy by squeezing, and moved with impressive deliberation and solemnity—and when we stepped out on the fourth floor there stood Taylor eagerly waiting with his eyes sparkling and both hands out tended. We shook and shook and shook—most vigorously at first, less vigorously presently and with a quite pallid and failing energy energy ener-‖energy at the last. I mean that this was my case; it wasn’t Taylor’s; Taylor shook vigorously all the way through. We sat down at his sumptuous table, and I began to talk pretty gay old reminiscences of the early days in Virginia City, and he began to respond with equally gay reminiscences of old times in Keokuk, Iowa Keokuk, Iowa Keokuk Island . Mine didn’t seem to hit him anywhere, and certainly his didn’t ever hit me. Neither of us wanted to spoil this happy renewal of a fond old friendship; and so I never came out brutally and said I had never seen him in Keokuk and did not know before that he had ever been there; also I didn’t say his reminiscences had never happened in my neighborhood. I pretended in a lame and poorly acted way to sort of dimly remember those things without being quite able to call back the particulars—“it was so long ago you know.” At the same time he was doing the same charitable thing by my Virginia City reminiscences; he only just vaguely remembered them and could not call to mind any distinct particular except that he had never been in Virginia City. When this condition of things became at last unbearable I broke out and said: “Oh come now call a halt. Let us throw off this humbuggery and come to an understanding. Who are you anyway? Have we ever met before or is this all a blunder? I have been in Keokuk, I know what year it was when I left there. I have noticed that your reminiscences of those joyous Keokuk days all begin with the summer of 1857, whereas I have not seen Keokuk since the January of that year. Who are you? Who am I? Are you you, am I I? It looks to me as if it is neither of us.” An explanation promptly cleared the atmosphere and made everything pleasant and agreeable for the rest of the evening. He had known my brother Orion in Keokuk and probably hadn’t known him well enough to notice so little a thing as the difference between his name and mine. When I had first begun to shake hands with him I was cordial and unsuspecting; unsuspecting and undoubting; but before the hand-shaking had been completed completed cojpleted I was saying to myself dubiously “But can this be Howard Taylor?” The first reminiscence I dealt him from my hand fell so flat that I could hear it slap the floor. It was this. I said: “How would you like to have some hog-wash now?” I have never seen a person look blanker than he did. He didn’t look the kind of blankness that would indicate that he had forgotten about hog-wash, it was the kind of uncompromising blankness which indicated that he had never heard of hog-wash before in his life. Now that three years have gone by and I am acclimated to old age and can look back upon its birth without any sentimental pangs, I think I will insert here (if I have not inserted it in some earlier chapter of this autobiography) the grand account of the banquet which Colonel Harvey gave in celebration of my seventieth birthday, and which appeared in Harper’s Weekly Harper’s Weekly Harper’s Weekly a week later.