30 August 1907 Dictated August August Aug. 30, 1907 Luncheon with Sir Norman Lockyer—Luncheon with the Plasmon directors directors Directors —Paying calls with little Francesca—The Punch Punch Punch dinner. Ashcroft’s notes: Friday, July 5 Friday, July 5 Friday July 5 . Dined with the Earl and Countess of Portsmouth. Forty or fifty guests; two or three hundred came in afterward. Saturday, July 6 Saturday, July 6 Saturday July 6 . Breakfasted at Lord Avebury’s. Among those present were Lord Kelvin, Sir Charles Lyell Lyell Lyall , and Sir Archibald Geikie. Quarters at the hotel occupied by invasion of photographers and portrait-sketchers during more than two hours; sat 22 times for photographs and 4 times for crayons; too exhausting, will sit no more. Savage Club dinner in the evening; white suit; “fake” Ascot Cup presented; Brennan mono-rail car exhibited in action.Sunday, July 7 Sunday, July 7 Sunday July 7 . Lunched with the astronomer, Sir Norman Lockyer. Except Linley Sambourne, the veteran Punch cartoonist, and Admiral Sir Cyprian Bridge, whom I had known in Australia in ’95, all present were scientists. Drove two hours and a half returning calls, with little Francesca for company and support.Monday, July 8 Monday, July 8 Monday July 8 . Lunched with Plasmon Directors at Bath Club. Dined privately at Moberly Bell’s.Tuesday, July 9 Tuesday, July 9 Tuesday July 9 . Lunched at the House of Commons with Sir Benjamin Stone. Many guests, chief among them Mr. Balfour, and Komura, the Japanese ambassador. Punch dinner in the evening. No white-headed antiquity of my sex whose years exceed seventy, likes to pay social calls; he dreads to see the calling hour come round, he rejoices when the task task dreaded task is over for the day; he is often sensible of a guilty gladness when he finds the people “out.” But I know a secret now that will make call-paying call-paying call-paying a delight to me hereafter. When I had been in England just a fortnight I had been constantly seeking and finding excuses for postponing return-visits, with the result that the accumulation of debts of this kind was so large that it had become a heavy and depressing burden upon my conscience; then I chanced to come across, in the hotel drawing-room, a sweet and pretty and charming little maid of sixteen whom I had known in the ship, and my depressing burden became at once a prized treasure, for I borrowed this child of her mother, and at four o’clock every day thereafter we drove about London during two hours paying calls. Never was a task so light. so light. more delightful. so light. We presently got the best of the list, and after that we cleared the the our the record every day, and kept it squared squared up squared to date. That simple and honest and charming child made her way everywhere; she entered English homes of all ranks; she was petted by English people of all ages and all social degrees; she saw English home life in all its phases, from the humblest all the way up, and by grace of her winning ways and her sweet modesty she left friends behind her, and only friends, wherever she went. I was proud of my sample of the American country-bred girl, and perhaps perhaps perhaps did not take much pains to conceal it. She will enter Bryn Mawr presently, already possessed of one chapter of valuable knowledge which not many American country lassies lassies lassies have acquired at her age. We paid calls together every day for a fortnight, and when I sailed for home my score was clear. The luncheon with the Plasmon directors directors Directors was a business matter, and of a mutually congratulatory sort. Seven years ago I assisted in founding the Plasmon Company; I took five thousand pounds of its stock and paid par for it; it is worth eighty thousand dollars now, and will soon be worth more. Several years ago an American Plasmon Company was started, and in a little while was robbed, skinned, and reduced to bankruptcy by its own Board of Directors, one of whom—Henry A. Butters, a sharper hailing from Long Valley, California—swindled me out of my investment in it, amounting to thirty-two thousand dollars. The Punch dinner will remain one of my pleasantest memories of my four weeks’ sojourn in England. That dinner was a unique distinction—it it it stands all alone, it has not had its fellow. For fifty years the Punch staff has assembled assembled assembled at dinner once a week in Punch’s own quarters, in Punch’s own private dining room dining room dining-room , to dine, dine, feed sumptuously, dine, and, meantime, to consider and discuss and plan and arrange the literature and art for the next week’s issue. Punch has always been hospitable to visiting foreigners of repute in the various walks of Literature and Art, and has dined and wined them; them; them; nobly; but never until now, on his own premises; never until now, in his own private dining room dining room dining-room . In fifty years I am the only stranger unto whom has been extended the privilege of crossing that sacred threshold and sitting at that sacred board. I mean to remember this. I mean to remember this. I mean to remember this. MARK TWAIN LEAVES ENGLAND FOR HOME No Foreigner Ever Received So Warm a Welcome There. cheered by the stevedores when he landed, and later honored by royalty. Social Attitude of American Diplomats Attracts Attention Abroad—More Men of Brains and Fewer Rich Men in the Service Would Be Desirable—American-Japanese Situation Regarded Seriously in Most of the European Capitals. N.Y. Sun-Syracuse Herald—Cablegram London, July 13.—Mark Twain sailed to-day, and it is fitting that a serious word should be said about his extraordinary month’s visit to England. No foreigner has ever been treated as he has been treated by the English people. His welcome began as he walked down the gangplank when the stevedores on the dock broke into cheers. The highest and the greatest in the land had joined eagerly in all forms of tribute to this untitled friend of all mankind. He says himself that the universal welcome by the masses at every opportunity has pleased him most. The wonder is that a man of 72 or any age should go through the enormous programme of the past four weeks and live to tell the tale. Mr. Clemens not only lived but thrived upon it, and he goes home to write such a chapter of his autobiography as no other American was ever able to record. If the truth must be told, Twain’s popularity in England is of a warmer and more personal nature than even in his own country. He has won the hearts of Englishmen as no living writer has done, and they love to do him honor. The cheers at his departure to-day were of a different note from those on his arrival, and for once his emotion silenced him as he waved good bye. Punch’s Tribute to Mark Twain Mr. Punch does himself the honor to drink your health, sir. Mr. Punch . . . health, sir. Mr. Punch does himself the honor to drink your health, sir.