19 January 1906 Friday, January 19, 1906 title Friday, January 19, 1906 Friday, Jan. 19, 1906. (Dictated (put in the date in 1906) Munro canceled SLC’s ‘(put in the date’ and supplied ‘in 1906’ and an open parenthesis, all in pencil [Dictated in 1906.] About Dueling. About Dueling. (About Dueling). About Dueling. not in In those early days days days days 1864 dueling dueling dueling duelling suddenly became a fashion in the new Territory Territory territory Territory of Nevada, and by 1864 1864 (1864) typed in the margin (1864) typed in the margin, deleted by Paine, and restored by SLC with the instruction ‘stet.’ (1864.) inset everybody was anxious to have a chance in the new sport, mainly for the reason that he was not able to thoroughly respect himself so long as he had not killed or crippled somebody in a duel or been killed or crippled in one himself. At that time I had been serving as city editor on Mr. Goodman’s Virginia City Enterprise Enterprise Enterprise “Enterprise” for a matter of two years. I was twenty-nine years old. I was ambitious in several ways, but I had entirely escaped the seductions of the seductions of not in the seductions of the seductions of that particular craze. craze. fashion. fashion. craze. craze. I had had no desire to fight a duel; duel; duel. duel.; period mended to a semicolon duel; I had no intention of provoking one. I did not feel respectable, but I got a certain amount of satisfaction out of feeling safe. I was ashamed of myself; the rest of the staff were ashamed of me—but I got along well enough. I had always been accustomed to feeling ashamed of myself, for one thing or another, so there was no novelty for me in the situation. I bore it very well. Plunkett was on the staff; staff; staff. staff.; period mended to a semicolon staff; R. M. Daggett was on the staff. These had tried to get into duels, but duels, but duels but, duels, but, duels, but for the present present present, present, present had failed, and were waiting. Goodman was the only one of us who had done anything to shed credit upon the paper. The rival paper was the Virginia Union. Union. Union. “Union.” Its editor for a little while was Tom Fitch Tom Fitch Fitch Tom Fitch Tom Fitch , called the “silver-tongued “silver-tongued “silver-tongued “silver-tongued orator of Wisconsin” Wisconsin” Wisconsin” Wisconsin” —that was where he came from. He tuned up his oratory in the editorial columns of the Union, Union, Union, “Union,” and Mr. Goodman invited him out and modified him with a bullet. I remember the joy of the staff when Goodman’s challenge was accepted by Fitch. We ran late that night, and made much of Joe Goodman. He was only twenty-four years old; he lacked the wisdom which a person has at twenty-nine, and he was as glad of being it as I was that I wasn’t. He chose Major Graves for his second (that name is not right, but it’s close enough, enough, enough, enough; I don’t remember the Major’s name). Graves came over to instruct Joe in the dueling dueling dueling duelling art. He He Graves He He had been a major major Major under Walker, the “gray-eyed “gray-eyed “grey-eyed “grey-eyed “gray-eyed man of destiny,” destiny,” destiny,” destiny,” destiny,” and had fought all through that remarkable man’s filibustering campaign in Central America. That That This That That fact gauges gauges gauges guages the Major. To say that a man was a major major Major under Walker, and came out of that struggle ennobled by Walker’s praise, is to say that the Major was not merely a brave man but that he was brave to the very utmost limit of that word. All of Walker’s men were like that. I knew the Gillis family intimately. The father made the the a the the campaign under Walker, and with him one son. They were in the memorable Plaza fight, and stood it out to the last against overwhelming odds, as did also all of the Walker men. The son was killed at the father’s side. The father received a bullet through the eye. The old man—for he was an old man at the time—wore spectacles, and the bullet and one of the glasses went into his his the his his skull skull skull, skull, skull and remained there—but often, in after years, when I boarded in the old man’s home in San Francisco, whenever he became emotional I used to see him shed tears tears tears, tears and glass, in a way that was infinitely moving. It is wonderful how glass breeds when it has a fair chance. This glass was all broken up and ruined, so it had no market value; but in the course of time he exuded enough to set up a spectacle shop with. remained there—but . . . with. the bullet remained there —but . . . with. the bullet remained there.—but . . . with. remained there. There were some other other other others sons: Steve, George, and Jim, very young chaps—the merest lads—who wanted to be in the Walker expedition, for they had their father’s dauntless spirit. But Walker wouldn’t have them; he said it was a serious expedition, and no place for children. The Major was a majestic creature, with a most stately and dignified and impressive military bearing, and he was by nature and training courteous, polite, graceful, winning; and he had that quality which I think I have encountered in only one other man—Bob Howland—a mysterious a mysterious that that a mysterious a mysterious quality which resides in the eye; and eye; and eye;. Aand period mended to a semicolon eye; and when that eye is turned upon an individual or a squad, in warning, that is enough. The man that has that eye doesn’t need to go armed; he can move upon an armed desperado and quell him and take him prisoner without saying a single word. I saw Bob Howland do that, that, that that, that, once—a slender, good-natured, amiable, gentle, kindly little skeleton of a man, with a sweet blue eye that would win your heart when it smiled upon you, or turn cold and freeze it, it, it, it, according to the nature of the occasion. The Major stood Joe up straight; stood Steve Gillis up fifteen paces away; made Joe turn his right side towards Steve, cock his navy six-shooter—that prodigious weapon—and hold it straight down against his leg; told him that that was the correct position for the gun—that the position ordinarily in use at Virginia City (that is to say, the gun straight up in the air, then brought then brought bring it bring it then brought then brought slowly down to your man) was all wrong. At the word “One,” “One,” “One,” “One,” ‘One’ underscored One you must raise the gun slowly and steadily to the place on the other man’s body that you desire to convince. Then, after a pause, “two, three—fire—Stop!” Then, after a pause, “two, three—fire—Stop!” “One, two, three—fire—Stop!” “One, Then, after a pause, “two, three—fire—Stop!” ‘ “two, three—fire—Stop!” ’ underscored Then, after a pause, “two, three—fire—Stop!” At the word “stop,” you may fire—but not earlier. You may give yourself as much time as you please after that word. Then, when you fire, you may advance and go on firing at your leisure and pleasure, if you can get any pleasure out of it. And, in the meantime, the other man, if he has been properly instructed and is alive to his privileges, is advancing on you, and firing—and it is always likely that more or less trouble will result. Naturally, when Joe’s revolver had risen to a level it was pointing at Steve’s breast, but the Major said “No, that is not wise. Take all the risks of getting murdered yourself, but don’t run any risk of murdering the other man. If you survive a duel you want to survive it in such a way that the memory of it will not not not not linger along with you through the rest of your life life life, life, life and interfere with your sleep. Aim at your man’s leg; not at the knee, not above the knee; for those are dangerous spots. Aim below the knee; cripple him, but leave the rest of him to his mother.” By grace of these truly wise and excellent instructions, Joe tumbled his man down his man down his man down Fitch down next morning with a bullet through his lower leg, which furnished him a permanent limp. And Joe lost nothing but a lock of hair, which he could spare better then than he could now. For when I saw him here in New York here in New York here here in New York here in New York a year ago, his crop was gone; he had nothing much left but a fringe, with a dome rising above. About a year later I got my chance. But I was not hunting for it. Goodman went off to San Francisco 1864 1864 (1864) typed in the margin (1864.) inset for a week’s holiday, and left me to be chief editor. I had supposed that that was an easy berth berth berth birth , there being nothing to do but write one editorial per day; day; day,; comma mended to a semicolon day; but I was disappointed in that superstition. I couldn’t find anything to write an article about, about, about, about, the first day. Then it occurred to me that inasmuch as it was the 22d 22d 22nd of April, 1864, the next morning would be the three-hundredth anniversary of Shakspeare’s Shakspeare’s Shakespeare’s birthday—and what better theme could I want than that? I got the Cyclopedia Cyclopedia Cyclopaedia and examined it, and found out who Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakespeare was and what he had done, and I borrowed all that and laid it before a community that couldn’t have been better prepared for instruction about Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakespeare than if they had been prepared by art. There wasn’t enough enough enough enough originally ‘enough’ ; underscore canceled; SLC also wrote a delete mark in the margin, then canceled it enough of what Shakspeare Shakspeare Shakespeare had done to make an editorial of the necessary length, but I filled it out with what he hadn’t done—which in many respects was more important and striking and readable than the handsomest things he had really accomplished. But next day I was in trouble again. There were no more Shakspeares Shakspeares Shakespeares to work up. There was nothing in past history, or in the world’s future possibilities, to make an editorial out of, of, of of, of, suitable to that community; so there was but one theme left. That theme was Mr. Laird, proprietor of the Virginia Union. Union. Union. “Union.” His editor had gone off to San Francisco too, and Laird was trying his hand at editing. I woke up Mr. Laird with some courtesies of the kind that were fashionable among newspaper editors in that region, and he came back at me the next day in a most vitriolic way. He was hurt by something I had said about him—some little thing—I don’t remember what it was now—probably called him a horse-thief, or one of those little phrases customarily used to describe another editor. They were no doubt just, and accurate, but Laird was a very sensitive creature, and he didn’t like it. So we expected a challenge from Mr. Laird, because according to the rules—according to the etiquette of dueling dueling dueling duelling as reconstructed and reorganized and improved by the duelists duelists duelists duellists of that region—whenever you said a thing about another person that he didn’t like, it wasn’t sufficient for him to talk back in the same same same, or a more same, or a more same offensive spirit: etiquette spirit: etiquette spirit:. Eetiquette period mended to a colon spirit: etiquette required him to send a challenge; so we waited for a challenge—waited all day. It didn’t come. And as the day wore along, hour after hour, and no challenge came, the boys grew depressed. They lost heart. But I was cheerful; I felt better and better all the time. They couldn’t understand it, but I I I I originally ‘I’; underscore canceled I could understand it. It was my make that enabled me to be cheerful when other people were despondent. So then it became necessary for us to waive etiquette and challenge Mr. Laird. When we reached that decision, they began to cheer up, but I began to lose some of my animation. However, in enterprises of this kind you are in the hands of your friends; there is nothing for you to do but to abide by what they consider to be the best course. Daggett wrote a challenge for me, for Daggett had the language—the right language—the convincing language—and I lacked it. Daggett poured out a stream of unsavory epithets upon Mr. Laird, charged with a vigor and venom of a strength calculated to persuade him; him; him,; comma mended to a semicolon him; and Steve Gillis, my second, carried the challenge and came back to wait for the return. It didn’t come. The boys were exasperated, but I kept my temper. Steve carried another challenge, hotter than the other, and we waited again. Nothing came of it. I began to feel quite comfortable. I began to take an interest in the challenges myself. I had not felt any before; but it seemed to me that I was accumulating a great and valuable reputation at no expense, and my delight in this grew and grew, as challenge after challenge was declined, until by midnight I was beginning to think that there was nothing in the world so much to be so much to be I so much to be SLC added ‘to be’ but inadvertently left ‘I’ standing; Hobby struck out ‘I’ in pencil so much to be desired as a chance to fight a duel. So I hurried Daggett up; made him keep on sending challenge after challenge. Oh, well, I overdid it: Laird accepted. it: Laird accepted. it. it.: Laird accepted. period mended to a colon it; Laird accepted. I might have known known suspected suspected known known that that would happen—Laird Laird that Laird Laird was a man you couldn’t depend on. The boys were jubilant beyond expression. They helped me make my will, which was another discomfort—and I already had enough. Then they took me home. I didn’t sleep any—didn’t want to sleep. I had plenty of things to think about, and less than four hours to do it in in in in —because five o’clock was the hour appointed for the tragedy, and I should have to use up one hour—beginning at four—in practising practising practicing practising with the revolver and finding out which end of it to level at the adversary. At four we went down into a little gorge, about a mile from town, and borrowed a barn door barn door barn-door barn door for a mark—borrowed it of a man who was over in California on a visit—and we set the barn door barn door barn-door barn door up and stood a fence-rail up against the middle of it, to represent Mr. Laird. But the it, to represent Mr. Laird. But the it. The it., to represent Mr. Laird. But tThe it, to represent Mr. Laird. But the rail was no proper representative representative respresentative representative of him, him, Mr. Laird, Mr. Laird, him, him, for he was longer than a rail and thinner. Nothing would ever fetch him but a line shot, and then as like like likely like as not he would split the bullet—the worst material for dueling dueling dueling duelling purposes that could be imagined. I began on the rail. I couldn’t hit the rail; then I tried the barn door; but rail; then . . . but rail; rail; then . . . but rail; then . . . but I couldn’t hit the barn door barn door barn-door barn door . There was nobody in danger except stragglers around on the flanks of that mark. I was thoroughly discouraged, and I didn’t cheer up any when we presently heard pistol-shots pistol-shots pistol shots pistol-shots pistol-shots over in the next little ravine. I knew what that was—that was Laird’s gang out practising practising practicing practising him. They would hear my shots, and of course they would come up over the ridge to see what kind of a record I was making—see what their chances were against me. Well, I hadn’t any record; and I knew knew originally ‘knew’; underscore canceled knew that if Laird came over that ridge and saw saw looked at looked at saw saw my barn door barn door barn-door barn door without a scratch on it, he would be as anxious to fight fight fight a duel fight as I was—or as I had been at midnight, before that disastrous acceptance came. Now just at this moment, a little bird, no bigger than a sparrow, flew along by and lit on a sage-bush about thirty yards away. Steve whipped out his revolver and shot its head off. Oh, Oh, Oh, Oh, he was a marksman—much better than I was. We ran down there to pick up the bird, and just then, sure enough, Mr. Laird and his people came over the ridge, and they joined us. And when Laird’s second saw that bird, with its head shot off, he lost color, he faded, color, he faded, color, color, he faded, color, he faded, and you could see that he was interested. He said, “Who said, ¶ “Who said no ¶ “Who said ¶ “Who said: ¶ “Who did that?” Before ¶ Before no ¶ Before ¶ Before ¶ Before I could answer, Steve spoke up and said quite calmly, and in a matter-of-fact matter-of-fact matter of fact matter-of-fact way, way, way, way, “Clemens ¶ “Clemens no ¶ “Clemens ¶ “Clemens ¶ “Clemens did it.” The ¶ The no ¶ The ¶ The ¶ The second said, said, said said, said, “Why, that is wonderful. How far off was that bird?” Steve said, ¶ Steve said, no ¶ Steve said ¶ Steve said, ¶ Steve said, “Oh, not far—about thirty yards.” The ¶ The no ¶ The ¶ The ¶ The second said, said, said said, said, “Well, “Well, “Well, “Well, that is astonishing shooting. How often can he do that?” Steve ¶ Steve no ¶ Steve ¶ Steve ¶ Steve said languidly, languidly, languidly, languidly, “Oh, about four times out of five?” five?” five?” five.” I knew the little rascal was lying, but I didn’t say anything. The second said, said, said, said, “Why “Why “Why “Why, that is amazing amazing wonderful wonderful amazing amazing shooting; shooting; shooting; why, shooting; why, shooting; I supposed he couldn’t hit a church.” He was supposing very sagaciously, but I didn’t say anything. Well, they said good morning. The second took Mr. Laird home, a little tottery on his legs, and Laird sent back a note in his own hand declining to fight a duel with me on any terms whatever. Well, my life was saved—saved by that accident. I don’t know what the bird thought about that interposition of Providence, but I felt very, very comfortable over it—satisfied and content. Now, we found out, later, out, later, out, later, originally ‘later’; underscore canceled out, later, that Laird had hit his hit his hit his hit his mark four times out of six, right along. If the duel had come off, he would have so filled my skin skin skin up skin with bullet-holes that it wouldn’t have held my principles. By breakfast-time breakfast-time breakfast time breakfast-time the news was all over town town town,— SLC inserted a comma, then canceled both the comma and the dash town that I had sent a challenge and Steve Gillis had carried it. Now that would entitle us to two years apiece in the penitentiary, according to the brand-new law. Judge Judge Governor Judge North sent us no message as coming from himself, but a message came from a close friend of his. He said it would be a good idea for us to leave the Territory Territory territory by the first stage-coach. This would sail next morning, at four o’clock—and in the meantime we would be searched for, but not with avidity; and if we were in the Territory Territory territory Territory after that stage-coach left, we would be the first victims of the new law. Judge Judge Judge Judge Governor Judge North was anxious to have some object-lessons object-lessons victims victims object-lessons object-lessons for that law, and he would absolutely keep us in the prison the full two years. He wouldn’t pardon us out to please anybody. He . . . anybody. He . . . anybody. not in Well, it seemed to me that our society was no longer desirable in Nevada; so we stayed in our quarters and observed proper caution all day—except that once Steve went over to the hotel to attend to another customer of mine. That was a Mr. Cutler. You see Laird was not the only person whom I had tried to reform during my occupancy of the editorial chair. I had looked around and selected several other people, and delivered a new zest of life into them through warm criticism and disapproval—so that when I laid down my editorial pen I had four horse-whippings and two duels owing to me. We didn’t care for the horse-whippings; there was no glory in them; they were not worth the trouble of collecting. But honor required that some notice should be taken of that other duel. Mr. Cutler had come up from Carson City, and had and had and and had and had sent a man over with a challenge from the hotel. Steve went over to pacify him. Steve weighed only ninety-five pounds, but it was well known throughout the Territory Territory territory that with his fists he could whip anybody that walked on two legs, let his weight and science be what they might. Steve was a Gillis, and when a Gillis confronted a man and had a proposition to make make make make, the proposition always contained business. When Cutler found that Steve was my second he cooled down; he became calm and rational, rational, rational, rational, and was ready to listen. Steve gave him fifteen minutes to get out of the hotel, and half an hour to get out of town or there would be results. So that duel went off successfully, because Mr. Cutler immediately left for Carson immediately left for Carson went off toward Carson, immediately went off toward left for Carson, immediately left for Carson a convinced and reformed man. I have never had anything to to [◇o] damaged to do with duels since. I thoroughly disapprove of duels. I consider them unwise, and I know they are dangerous. Also, sinful. Also, sinful. not in Also, sinful. Also, sinful. If a man should challenge me now, I would would should shwould would go to that man and take him kindly and forgivingly kindly and forgivingly not in kindly and forgivingly kindly and forgivingly by the hand and lead him to a quiet retired spot, spot, spot spot, spot, and kill him. Still, I no ¶ Still, I no ¶ Still, I no ¶ Still, I ¶ [Dictated March 12, 1906.] I have always taken a great interest in other people’s duels. One always feels an abiding interest in any heroic thing which has entered into his own experience. In 1878 1878 (1878) typed in the margin (1878.) inset , fourteen years after my unmaterialized unmaterialized successful unmaterialized unmaterialized duel, Messieurs Fourtou Fourtou Fortu and Gambetta fought a duel which made heroes of both of them in France, but but and and but but made them rather rather not in rather rather ridiculous throughout the rest of the world. I was living in Munich that fall and winter, and I was so interested in that funny tragedy funny tragedy duel duel funny tragedy funny tragedy that I wrote a long account of it, and it is in one of my books, somewhere—an account which had some inaccuracies in it, but as an exhibition of the spirit of that duel, I think it was correct and trustworthy. And when I was living in Vienna, thirty-four thirty-four twenty-four twenty-thirty-four thirty-four years after my ineffectual duel, my interest in that kind of incident was still strong; and I find here among my Autobiographical Autobiographical not in Autobiographical Autobiographical manuscripts of that day a chapter a chapter an article an article a chapter a chapter which I began concerning it, but did not finish. I wanted to finish it it it it, but held it open in the hope that the Italian Ambassador Ambassador ambassador , M. Nigra, would find time to furnish me the full history of Signor Signor Señor tilde added Señor Cavallotti’s Cavallotti’s Cavalotti’s adventures in that line. But he was a busy man; there was always an interruption before he could get well started; so my hope was never fulfilled. The following is the unfinished chapter. The following is the unfinished chapter. not in The following is the unfinished chapter. The following is the unfinished chapter: As concerns dueling. This ¶ As concerns dueling. This Dueling. double rule ¶ This Dueling. rule ¶ As concerns dueling. This ¶ As concerns dueling. This pastime is as common in Austria to-day as it is in France. But with this difference, that here in the Austrian States the duel is dangerous, while in France it is not. Here it is tragedy, in France it is comedy; here it is a solemnity, there it 1898 1898 not in 1898 inserted and boxed in the right margin (1898.) inset is monkey-shines; here the duelist duelist duelist duellist risks his life, there he does not even risk his shirt. Here he fights with pistol or sabre, in France with a hair-pin hair-pin hair-pin hairpin —a blunt one. Here the desperately wounded man tries to walk to the hospital; there they paint the scratch so that they can find it again, lay the sufferer on a stretcher, and conduct him off the field with a band of music. At the end of a French duel the pair hug and kiss and cry, and praise each other’s valor; then the surgeons surgeons surgeons ex surgeons make an examination and pick out the scratched one, and the other one helps him onto onto onto on to the litter and pays his fare; and in return the scratched one treats to champagne and oysters in the evening, and then “the incident is closed,” as the French say. It is all polite, and gracious, and pretty pretty pretty and pretty pretty, and impressive. At the end of an Austrian duel the antagonist that is alive gravely offers his hand to the other man, utters some phrases of courteous regret, then bids him good-bye good-bye good-bye good-by and goes his way, and that incident also is closed. The French duelist duelist duelist duellist duellist is painstakingly painstakingly pains-takingly painstakingly protected from danger, by the rules of the game. His antagonist’s weapon cannot reach so far as his body; if he get a scratch it will not be above his elbow. But in Austria the rules of the game do not provide against danger, they carefully provide for it, usually. Commonly the combat must be kept up until one of the men is disabled; a non-disabling slash or stab does not retire him. For a matter of three months I watched the Viennese journals, and whenever a duel duel good duel duel was reported in their telegraphic columns I scrap-booked it. By this record I find that dueling dueling dueling duelling in Austria is not confined to journalists and old maids, journalists and old maids, journalists, and old maids, journalists and old maids, as in France, but is indulged in by military men, journalists, students, physicians, lawyers, members of the legislature, and even the Cabinet, the Cabinet, the Cabinet, the Cabinet, the Bench and the police. Dueling Dueling Dueling Duelling is forbidden by law; and so it seems odd to see the makers and administrators of the laws dancing on their work in this way. Some months ago Count Badeni Badeni Badeni Bodeni , at that time chief chief chief Chief of the Government, fought a pistol-duel here in the capital city of the Empire with representative Wolf, and both of those distinguished Christians came near getting turned out of the Church—for the Church as well as the State forbids dueling dueling dueling duelling . In one case, lately, in Hungary, the police interfered and stopped a duel after the first innings. This was a sabre-duel sabre-duel sabre duel sabre-duel between the chief of police and the city attorney. Unkind things were said about it by the newspapers. They said the police remembered their duty uncommonly well when their own officials were the parties concerned in duels. But I think the underlings showed good bread-and-butter judgment. If their superiors had carved each other well, the public would have asked asked asked asked, Where were the police? and their places would have been endangered; but custom does not require them to be around where mere unofficial citizens are explaining a thing with sabres. There was another duel—a double duel—going on in the immediate neighborhood at the time, and in this case the police obeyed custom and did not disturb it. Their bread and butter was not at stake there. In this duel a physician fought a couple of surgeons, and wounded both—one of them lightly, the other seriously. An undertaker wanted to keep people from interfering, to keep people from interfering, to interfere, to keep people from interfering, to keep people from interfering, but that was quite natural again. again. again. Whenever a man tries to stop a duel in Austria you can trace it to some selfish impulse. again. Selecting at random from my record, I next find a duel at Tarnopol at Tarnopol at Tarnopol at Tarnopol between military men. men. men of. men. An officer of the Tenth Dragoons charged an officer of the Ninth Dragoons with an offence against the laws of the card-table. There was a defect or a doubt or a doubt or a doubt or a doubt somewhere in the matter, and this had to be examined and passed upon by a Court Court Court Court corrected miswriting Court of Honor. So the case was sent up to Lemberg up to Lemberg up to Lemburg up to Lemberg up to Lemberg for this purpose. One would like to know what the defect was, but the newspaper does not say. A man here who has fought many duels and has a graveyard, says that probably the matter in question was as to whether the accusation was true or not; that if not; that if not.; that Iif revised by SLC; ‘I’ corrected to ‘i’ by Hobby; period mended to a semicolon not; that if the charge was a very grave one—cheating, for instance—proof of its truth would rule the guilty officer out of the field of honor; the Court would not allow a gentleman to fight with such a person. You see what a solemn thing it is; you see how particular they are; any little careless act act speech act can lose you your privilege of getting yourself shot, here. The Court seems to have gone into the matter in a searching and careful fashion, for several months elapsed before it reached a decision. It then sanctioned a duel and the accused killed his accuser. Next I find a duel between a prince and a major; first with pistols—no result satisfactory to either party; then with sabres, and the major badly hurt. Next, a sabre-duel between journalists—the one a strong man, the other feeble and in poor health. It was brief; the strong one drove his sword through the weak one, and death was immediate. Next, a duel between a lieutenant and a student student student, student of medicine. According to the newspaper report these are the details. The student was in a restaurant one evening; evening; evening; evening: passing along, he halted at a table to speak with some friends; near-by near-by near by sat a dozen military men; the student conceived that one of these was “staring” “staring” “staring” ‘“staring’” single quotation marks mended to double at him; he asked the officer to step outside and explain. This officer and another one gathered up their caps and sabres and went out with the student. Outside—this is the student’s account—the student introduced himself to the offending officer and said said said said, “You “You “You ‘“You single quotation mark mended to double seemed to stare at me;” me;” me;” me;’” single quotation mark mended to double me”; for answer, the officer struck at the student with his fist; the student parried the blow; both officers drew their sabres and attacked the young fellow, and one of them gave him a wound on the left left left left arm; then they withdrew. This was Saturday night. The duel followed on Monday, in the military riding-school—the customary dueling-ground dueling-ground dueling-ground duelling-ground all over Austria, apparently. The weapons were pistols. The dueling-terms dueling-terms dueling-terms duelling terms were somewhat somewhat a step somewhat somewhat beyond custom in the matter of severity, severity, severity:, severity, if I may gather that from the statement that the combat was fought “unter sehr schweren Bedingungen” “unter sehr schweren Bedingungen” “unter “unter sehr schweren Bedingungen” ‘ “unter’ rewritten for clarity ‘“unter sehr schweren Bedingungen” single quotation mark mended to double by SLC; underscored by Munro “unter sehr schweren Bedingungen” —to wit to wit to-wit to wit , “Distance “Distance “Distance ‘“Distance single quotation mark mended to double , fifteen fifteen 15 steps—with three three 3 steps advance.” advance.” advance.” advance.’” single quotation mark mended to double There was but one exchange of shots. The student was hit. “He put his hand on his breast, his body began to bend slowly forward, then collapsed in death in death in death in death and sank to the ground.” It is pathetic. There are other duels in my list, but I find in each and all of them one and the same ever-recurring defect—the principals are never present, but only their sham representatives. The real principals in any duel are not the duelists duelists duelists duellists themselves, but their families. They do the mourning, the suffering, theirs is the loss and theirs the misery. They stake all that, the duelist duelist duelist duellist stakes nothing but his life, and that is a trivial thing compared with what his death must cost those whom he leaves behind him. Challenges should not mention the duelist; duelist; duelist; at all duelist; duellist; he has nothing much at stake, and the real vengeance cannot reach him. The challenge should summon the offender’s old gray mother, and his young wife and his little children,—these, or any to whom he is a dear and worshiped worshiped worshiped worshipped possession—and should say, “You have done me no harm, but I am the meek slave of a custom which requires me to crush the happiness out of your hearts and condemn you to years of pain and grief, in order that I may wash that I may wash to wipe that I may wash that I may wash clean with your tears a stain which has been put upon me by another person.” The logic of it is admirable: a person has robbed me of a penny; I must beggar ten innocent persons to make good my loss. Surely nobody’s “honor” is worth all that. Since Since The Since Since the duelist’s duelist’s duelist’s duellist’s family are the real principals in a duel, duel, duel, they duel, the State ought to compel them to be present at it. Custom, Custom, Custom Custom, also, ought to be so amended as to require it; and without it no duel ought to be allowed to go on. If that student’s unoffending mother had been present and watching the officer through her tears as he raised his pistol, he—why, he would have fired in the air. We know that. For we know how we are all made. Laws ought to be based upon the ascertained facts of our nature. It would be a simple thing to make a dueling-law dueling-law dueling-law duelling law which would stop dueling dueling dueling duelling. . As things are now, the mother is never invited. She submits to this; and without outward complaint, for she, too, she, too, she, too, she, too, is the vassal of custom, custom, custom, too, custom, and custom requires her to conceal her pain when she learns the disastrous news that her son must go to the dueling field dueling field dueling field duelling-field , and by the powerful force that is lodged in habit and custom she is enabled to obey this trying requirement—a requirement which exacts exacts requires exacts exacts a miracle of her, and gets it. Last Last In In Last Last January a neighbor of ours who has a young son son son ◇◇ son in the army was wakened by this youth at three o’clock one morning, and she sat up in bed and listened to his message: “I have come to tell you something, mother, which will distress you, but you must be good and brave, and bear bear bear hear it. I have been affronted by a fellow-officer fellow-officer fellow-officer fellow officer , and we fight at three this afternoon. Lie down and sleep, now, and think no more about it.” She kissed him good night and lay down paralysed paralysed paralysed paralyzed with grief and fear, but said nothing. But she did not sleep; she prayed and mourned till the first streak of dawn, then fled to the nearest church and implored the Virgin for help; and from that church she went to another and another and another; church after church, and still church after church, church, her church, church, and so spent all the day until three o’clock on her knees in agony and tears; then dragged herself home and sat down, down, down, down comfortless and desolate, to count the minutes, and wait, wait, with wait, wait, with an outward show of calm, for what had been ordained for her—happiness, or endless misery. Presently she heard the clank of a sabre—she had not known before what music was in that sound sound sound sound! —and her son put his head in and said: said: said:— said: “X “X “He “X “X was in the wrong, and he apologized apologized apologised apologized .” So that incident was closed; and for the rest of her life the mother will always find something pleasant about the clank of a sabre, no doubt. In one of my listed duels—however, let it go, there is nothing particularly striking about it except that the seconds interfered. And prematurely, too, for neither man was dead. This was certainly irregular. Neither of the men liked it. It was a duel with cavalry sabres, between an editor and a lieutenant. The editor walked to the hospital, the lieutenant was carried. In this country an editor who can write well is valuable, but he is not likely to remain so unless he can handle a sabre with charm. The following very recent very recent very recent very recent telegram shows that also in France duels are humanely stopped as soon as they approach the (French) danger-point: (Reuter’s Telegram.) centered (Reuter’s Telegram) centered (Reuter’s Telegram.) centered “REUTER’S TELEGRAM.) ‘ “REUTER’S TELEGRAM.)’ underscored by SLC, and marked in pencil by Munro to be set in italic capitals and lowercase ¶ “Reuter’s Telegram.— PARIS, March 5. The dateline position PARIS, March 5. ¶ The dateline position PARIS, March 5. ¶ The dateline position PARIS, March 5.— ¶ The dateline moved to begin paragraph ¶ Paris, March 5.—The duel between Colonels Henry and Picquart took place this morning in the Riding School of the Ecole Militaire, the doors of which were strictly guarded in order to prevent intrusion. The combatants, who fought with swords, were in position at ten o’clock. At At At “At the first re-engagement re-engagement re-engagement reengagement Lieut.-Colonel Lieut.-Colonel Lieut.-Colonel Lieut. Colonel Lieutenant-Colonel Henry was slightly scratched in the forearm forearm forearm fore arm , and just at the same moment his own blade appeared blade appeared bladesappeared blade appeared to touch his adversary’s neck. Senator Ranc, who was Colonel Picquart’s second, stopped the fight, but as it was found that his principal had not been touched, the combat continued. A very sharp encounter ensued, in which Colonel Henry was wounded in the elbow, and the duel then terminated. then terminated. then terminated. terminated.” After which, the stretcher and the band. In lurid contrast with this delicate flirtation, ¶ The following . . . flirtation, ¶ The following . . . flirtation, this section of the text, including the unidentified newspaper clipping, was inserted into the MS, pasted to a sheet below a single sentence (‘In . . . charm.’ at 301.45–46]) cut from the top of MS page 15; the rest of MS page 15 was pasted to a separate sheet and revised to follow the inserted section (see the entry for ‘we’ at 302.14) ¶ The following . . . flirtation, we we ¶ Finally we revised to accommodate the inserted text: see the entry for ‘¶ The following . . . flirtation,’ at 301.47–302.13 we have this fatal fatal deadly fatal duel of day before yesterday in Italy, where the earnest Austrian duel is in vogue. yesterday in Italy . . . vogue. yesterday—not in Austria, this time, but in Italy, which is the same thing as far as dueling is concerned. in Italy, where the earnest Austrian duel is in vogue. yesterday in Italy . . . in vogue. I knew Cavallotti Cavallotti Cavalotti slightly, and this gives me a sort of personal interest in his duel. I first saw him in Rome several years ago. He was sitting on a block of stone in the Forum, and was writing something in his note-book—a poem or a challenge, or something like that—and the friend who pointed him out to me said, “That is Cavallotti Cavallotti Cavalotti —he has fought thirty duels; do not disturb him.” I did not disturb him. him. him. him. extra line of space ¶ (Here insert—and translate—the German article about Cavalotti’s duels. Pinned to first copy of this autobiography.) paragraph bracketed and queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC him. May 13, 1907. It is a long time ago. Cavallotti Cavallotti Cavalotti was Cavalotti —poet, orator, satirist, statesman, patriot—was a great man, and his death was deeply lamented by his countrymen— countrymen— countrymen:— countrymen: many monuments to his memory testify to this. In his duels he killed several of his antagonists and disabled the rest. By nature he was a little irascible. By nature he was a little irascible. By nature he was a little irascible. By nature he was a little irascible. Once when the officials of the library of Bologna threw out his books the gentle poet went up there and challenged the whole fifteen! His parliamentary duties were exacting, but he proposed to keep coming up and fighting duels between trains until all those officials had been retired from the activities of life. Although he always chose the sword to fight with, he had never had a lesson with that weapon. When game was called he waited for nothing, but always plunged at his opponent and rained such a storm of wild and original wild and original wild and original wild and original thrusts and whacks upon him that the man was dead or crippled before he could bring his science to bear. But his latest antagonist discarded science, and won. He held his sword straight forward like a lance when Cavallotti Cavallotti Cavalotti made his plunge—with the result that he impaled himself upon it. It entered his mouth and passed out at the back of his neck. Death was instantaneous. May 13, 1907 . . . instantaneous. May 13, 1907 . . . instantaneous. [May 13, 1907.] . . . instantaneous.