16 April 1908 Dictated April 16, 1908 Return from Bermuda—Mr. Clemens’s mistake in not recognizing the Chief Justice—Some characteristics of Earl Grey. Miss Lyon and the Rogerses and I arrived back from Bermuda three days ago, after a delightful and health-restoring absence of seven weeks. I talked twice in that fairyland—once for the benefit of the Hospital and once for the benefit of the Aquarium. Upon the latter occasion I came near to making a regrettable blunder. The Opera House has no stage door, therefore I was brought down the central aisle and temporarily located in a chair in the front row, whence I was to mount to the stage by a short step-ladder when my time should come. I knew that my performance was to be preceded by a speech by the Chief Justice in the nature of a report of the condition and prospects of the Aquarium; I also knew that he would do his speaking not from the stage but from the floor of the house, bracing his back against the stage and facing the audience. At my right was an empty chair; at my left were four others; these four were swathed in British flags and were the places of honor; they were to be occupied by their Excellencies Excellencies eExcellencies ‘E’ underscored three times to capitalize Governor Wodehouse and wife wife wife, and by their visiting Excellencies Excellencies eExcellencies ‘E’ underscored three times to capitalize , Countess Grey Grey Grey, and Earl Grey, Governor-General of Canada. From old experience in lecturing around the world in British colonies I knew that the official group would not arrive until after the rest of the house had assembled. After I had been seated a while the Chief Justice came in and sat down at my right. I had known him a year ago, him a year ago, him, a year ago, but did not remember him. He was cordial, and I pretended to know him. I supposed that he was Jones, or Smith, or Brown, and that I was trespassing upon a seat which belonged by rights to his wife, or some other friend, so I hastened to assure him that I was going to occupy the seat only temporarily. I was meaning that for an apology, and I fully expected him to assure me that it was all right, and that his friend could wait, but he embarrassed me by not saying anything at all; necessarily my fraudulent cordiality had made him suppose that I knew him, and knew what he was there for, and so he naturally couldn’t think of anything to say in answer to a remark which hadn’t any sense in it. I was uncomfortable, and tried to think of something to talk about that could modify the awkwardness of the situation, but nothing occurred to me. I waited and waited, and fished around in my mind for something happy to say, but I didn’t catch anything. At last the house was crammed; then after a brief pause and a waiting silence the orchestra struck up “God Save the King,” and the house rose. I knew by this sign that the dignitaries had entered the place. They came down to the front and shook hands and took their seats, and I turned to my unknown and apparently new acquaintance at my right and started to say heartily, “Now if the damned Chief Justice would arrive and do his stunt the show could proceed,” but Providence interfered and saved me—the first favor I have received from that source this year—for just as I had got out the first word of the remark his Excellency Excellency eExcellency ‘E’ underscored three times to capitalize the Governor, with a bow and a smile and a wave of the hand toward my new friend, said: “Mr. Chief Justice, please take the floor.” I was paralysed paralysed paralyzed for a moment; then, as I came to, I felt as I had not felt before for sixty-five years—the time that the slave woman plucked me out of Bear Creek by the hair of my head when I was going down for the third time. Earl Grey is a winning and lovable man and a fine fine great fine and sterling character. He made the voyage back with us. He has lived a great deal upon the frontiers of the world and has been familiar with its rough life and its half-wild half-wild half wild cowboys cowboys cow-boys , gold-miners and ranchmen, and is unreservedly fond of those rude and manly men. He has no airs, and was ready to talk with anybody that came along; without effort he puts anybody and everybody at ease in a few moments—even young girls. One of my angel-fishes angel-fishes angel-fishes was along—a diffident Boston schoolgirl schoolgirl school-girl of sixteen years—and for five minutes after he joined us where we sat on the after-deck, in the sunshine, she was timid, and couldn’t find her vocabulary; but after a little while she was at home, her self-consciousness self-consciousness self consciousness disappeared, and she was eagerly and interestedly telling him a story which she had read, read, read, and requiring him to admire its several ingenuities in turn as she came to them—which he cordially did. He travels the Dominion in plain clothes and with no attendants except an aide-de-camp and a couple of uniformed mounted police; his friendly face wins his way for him everywhere. His aide-de-camp furnished me several instances of this; this; this,; comma mended to a semicolon one of them was to this effect: one day the little party rode up to a humble dwelling in the remotenesses of Canada, and a gray-headed Scotch-Presbyterian Scotch-Presbyterian Scotch-Presbyterian mother in Israel came out with a greeting for the horsemen and laid her hand upon the Earl’s knee and looked sweetly up at his face and said: “I see by the soldiers by the soldiers by the soldiers that you are the Governor-General, yet I seem to be no more afraid to talk to you than I would to talk to Christ.”