20 March 1906 Tuesday, March 20, 1906 About young John D. Rockefeller’s Sunday-school talks—Mr. Clemens is asked, as honorary member, to talk to the Bible Class—His letter of refusal—He accepts invitation from General General Gen. Fred Grant to speak at Carnegie Hall April 10th, for benefit of Robert Fulton Memorial Memorial Monument Association—His letter of acceptance. One of the standing delights of the American nation in these days is John D. Rockefeller, junior’s, Rockefeller, junior’s, Rockefeller, Jjunior’s, Rockefeller, junior’s, Bible Class adventures in theology. Every Sunday young Rockefeller explains the Bible to his class. The next day the newspapers and the Associated Press distribute his explanations all over the continent continent Continent and everybody laughs. The entire nation laughs, yet in its innocent dulness dulness dullness never suspects that it is laughing at itself. But that is what it is doing. Young Rockefeller, who is perhaps thirty-five years old, is a plain, simple, earnest, sincere, honest, well-meaning, commonplace person, destitute of originality or any suggestion of it. And if he were traveling upon his mental merit instead of upon his father’s money, his explanations of the Bible would fall silent and not be heard of by the public. But his father ranks as the richest man in the world, and this makes his son’s theological gymnastics interesting and important. The world believes that the elder Rockefeller is worth a billion dollars. He pays taxes on two million and a half. He is an earnest uneducated Christian, and for years and years has been Admiral of a Sunday-school in Cleveland, Ohio. For years and years he has discoursed about himself to his Sunday-school and explained how he got his dollars; and during all these years his Sunday-school has listened in rapture and has divided its worship between him and his Creator Creator cCreator ‘c’ underscored three times to capitalize Creator —unequally. His Sunday-school talks are telegraphed about the country and are as eagerly read by the nation as are his son’s. As I have said, the nation laughs at young Rockefeller’s analyzations of the Scriptures. Yet the nation must know that these analyzations are exactly like those which it hears every Sunday from its pulpits, and which its forebears forebears forbears have been listening to for centuries without a change of an idea—in case an idea has ever occurred in one of these discourses. Young John’s methods are the ordinary pulpit methods. His deductions of golden fancy from sordid fact are exactly the same which the pulpit has traded in for centuries. Every argument he uses was already worn threadbare by the theologians of all the ages before it came in its rags to him. All his reasonings are like all the reasonings of all the pulpit’s pulpit’s pulpit’s’ pulpit’s stale borrowings from the dull pulpits of the centuries. Young John has never studied a doctrine for himself; he has never examined a doctrine upon its real merits; he has never examined a doctrine for any purpose but to make it fit the notions which he got at second-hand from his teachers. His talks are quite as original and quite as valuable as any that proceed from any other theologian’s lips, from the Pope of Rome down to himself. The nation laughs at young John’s profound and clumsy examinations of Joseph’s character and conduct, yet the nation has always heard Joseph’s character and conduct examined in the same clumsy and stupid way by its pulpits, and the nation should reflect that when they laugh at young John they are laughing at themselves. They should reflect that young John is using no new whitewash upon Joseph. He is using the same old brush and the same old whitewash that have made Joseph grotesque in all the centuries. I have known and liked young John for many years, and I have long felt that his right place was in the pulpit. I am sure that the foxfire of his mind would make a proper glow there—but I suppose he must do as destiny has decreed and succeed his father as master of the colossal Standard Oil Corporation. One of his most delightful theological deliverances was his exposition, three years ago, of the meaning—the real meaning, the bottom meaning—of Christ’s admonition to the young man who was overburdened with wealth yet wanted to save himself if a convenient way could be found: “Sell all thou hast and give to the poor.” Young John reasoned it out to this effect: “Whatever thing stands between you and salvation, remove that obstruction at any cost. If it is money, give it away, to the poor; if it is property, sell the whole of it and give the proceeds to the poor; if it is military ambition, retire from the service; if it is an absorbing infatuation for any person or thing or pursuit, fling it far from you and proceed with a single mind to achieve your salvation.” The inference was plain. Young John’s father’s millions and his own were a mere incident in their lives and not in any way an obstruction in their pursuit of salvation. Therefore Christ’s admonition could have no application to them. One of the newspapers sent interviewers to six or seven New York clergymen to get their views upon this matter, with this result: that all of them except one agreed with young Rockefeller. I do not know what we should do without the pulpit. We could better spare the sun—the moon, anyway. Three years ago I went with young John to his Bible Class and talked to it—not theologically, that would not have been in good taste, and I prefer good taste to righteousness. Now whoever—on the outside—goes there and talks to that Bible Class is by that act entitled to honorary membership in it. Therefore I am an honorary member. Some days ago a Bible Class official sent me word that there would be a quinquennial meeting of these honoraries in their church day after to-morrow evening, and it was desired that I should come there and help do the talking. If I could not come, would I send a letter which could be read to those people? I was already overburdened with engagements, so I sent my regrets and the following letter: letter: letter. letter: March 14, 1906. Mr. Edward M. Foote, Chairman. Dear Friend and Fellow-Member: March . . . Fellow-Member: March 14, 1906. Mr. Edward M. Foote, Chairman. ¶ Dear Friend and Fellow-Member: March 14, 1906. Mr. Edward M. Foote, Chairman. ¶ Dear Friend and Fellow-Member: Indeed I should like to attend the reunion of the fellowship of honorary members of Mr. Rockefeller’s Bible Class, (of whom I am one, by grace of service rendered,) (of . . . rendered,) (of . . . rendered,) (of . . . rendered,) but I must be discreet discreet discreteet discreet and not venture. This is on account of Joseph. Joseph. Joseph,. Joseph. He might come up as an issue, and then I could get into trouble, for Mr. Rockefeller and I do not agree as to Joseph. Eight years ago I quite painstakingly and exhaustively explained Joseph, Joseph, Joseph, Joseph by the light of the 47th chapter of Genesis, in a North American Review article a North American Review article an a North American Review article which entitled “Concerning the Jews,” a North American Review article entitled “Concerning the Jews,” a North American Review article which has since been transferred to volume XXII volume XXII volume SLC left space after ‘volume’ for insertion of a number volume XXII the typist likewise left space after ‘volume’ volume XXII of my Collected Works; then I turned my attention to other subjects, under the impression that I had settled Joseph for good and all and left nothing further for anybody to say about him. Judge, then, of my surprise and sorrow, when by the newspapers I lately saw that Mr. Rockefeller had taken hold of Joseph—quite manifestly unaware that I I Joseph I I had already settled Joseph—and was trying to settle him again. In every sentence uttered by Mr. Rockefeller there was evidence that he he he had never seen my article he was not acquainted with Joseph. Therefore it was plain to me that he had never read my article. He has certainly not read it, because his published estimate of Joseph differs differs differs quite materially differs quite materially differs from mine. This could not be, if he had read the article. He thinks Joseph was Mary’s little lamb; this is an error. He was—he—but you look at the article, then you will see what he was. For ages Joseph has been a most delicate and difficult problem. That is, for everybody but me. It is because I examine him on the facts as they stand recorded, the other theologians other theologians others theologians other theologians don’t. Overborne by a sense of duty, they paint the facts. They paint some of them clear out. Paint them out, and paint some better ones in, which they get out of their own imaginations. They make up a Joseph-statement on the plan of the statement which a shaky a shaky an insolvent an insolvent a shaky a shaky bank gets up for the beguilement of the bank-inspector bank-inspector State’s bank-inspector State’s bank-inspector bank-inspector . They spirit away light-throwing liabilities, and insert fanciful assets in their places. Am I saying the thing that isn’t true? Sunday before last the very learned and able Dr. Dr. Dr. Dr. Silverman was was is is was was thus reported in the Times: reported in the Times: reported: reported: in the Times: reported in the Times: But the farmers, the agriculturists, and the shepherds, who depended for their living on the product of the land, suffered most during a famine. To prevent utter starvation Joseph had the people from the country removed to the cities, from one end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof, (Genesis, xlvii xlvii xlvii. xlvii , 21,) and there he supported them. As long as they had money he gave them food for money, but when this was exhausted he took their cattle, their horses, their herds and asses, and even their land, when necessary, as a pledge for food. The Government then fed the cattle, horses, &c., which otherwise would have died. Later the land [the ownership?] [the ownership?] not in the ownership? (the ownership?) was returned to the former owners; they were given seed to sow the land; they received as many of their cattle, horses, herds, &c., as they needed, and in payment were only required to give the Government one-fifth part of all their increase in animals or produce. The whole plan of Joseph was statesmanlike, as well as humanitarian. It appealed at once to Pharaoh and his counselors, and it is no wonder that Joseph was appointed Viceroy of All Egypt. Joseph successfully combated all the human sharks and speculators who had for years despoiled the poor in the season of famine and reduced them to starvation and beggary. He held the land and animals of the needy as pledge, and then returned them their patrimony. [The ownership?] [The ownership?] not in The ownership? (The ownership?) He charged them only a fair market price for the food they received. Without the wise institutions of public storehouses which Joseph had erected the people would have lost all their possessions, the whole country would have been reduced to misery, and thousands upon thousands would have died, as had been the case in previous seasons of famine. That is Dr. Dr. Dr. Dr. Silverman’s bank-statement bank-statement bank statement bank-statement bank-statement —all painted and gilded and ready for the inspector. This is the Bible’s statement. The italics are mine: statement. The italics are mine: statement: statement:. The italics are mine: statement. The italics are mine: And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore, so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine. And Joseph gathered up all all all all ‘all’ underscored all of the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought; and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh’s house. And when money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all all all all ‘all’ underscored all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth. And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if money fail. And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for all their cattle for all their cattle for all their cattle ‘for all their cattle’ underscored for all their cattle that year. When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, We will not hide it from my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not aught left not aught left not aught left not aught left ‘not aught left’ underscored not aught left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands our bodies, and our lands our bodies, and our lands our bodies, and our lands ‘our bodies, and our lands’ underscored our bodies, and our lands : Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy us us us us ‘us’ underscored us and our land our land our land our land ‘our land’ underscored our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give us seed that we may live, and not die, that the land be not desolate. And Joseph bought bought bought bought ‘bought’ underscored bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold sold sold sold ‘sold’ underscored sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh’s the land became Pharaoh’s the land became Pharaoh’s the land became Pharaoh’s ‘the land became Pharaoh’s’ underscored the land became Pharaoh’s . And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof. Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands. Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold I have bought you bought you bought you bought you ‘bought you’ underscored bought you this day and your land and your land and your land and your land ‘and your land’ underscored and your land for Pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land. And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your own food, and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones. And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh’s servants. And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth part; except the land of the priests only, which became not Pharaoh’s. I do not find anything there about a “pledge.” It looks to me like a brand-new asset—for Joseph. And a most handsome and ameliorating one, too—if a body could find some kind of authority for it. But I can’t find it; I do not find that Joseph made loans to those distressed peasants peasants paupers paupers peasants peasants and secured the loans by mortgage on their lands and animals, and animals, and animals, and animals. I seem to find that he took the land land lands themselves. land itself—to the last acre, and the animals too, to the last hoof. acre, and . . . hoof. acre., and . . . hoof. acre, and . . . hoof. And I do not get the impression that Joseph charged those starving unfortunates “only a fair market price for the food they received.” No, I get the impression that he skinned them of every last penny they had; of every last acre they had; of every last animal they had; then bought the whole nation’s bodies bodies bodies bodies ‘bodies’ underscored bodies and liberties liberties liberties liberties ‘liberties’ underscored liberties ‘liberties’ underscored on a “fair market” valuation for bread and the chains of slavery. Is it conceivable that there can be a “fair market price,” or any price whatever, estimable in gold, or diamonds, or bank notes, or government bonds, for a man’s supremest possession—that one possession without which his life is totally worthless—his liberty? Joseph acted handsome by the clergy; it is the most I can say for him. Politic, too. They haven’t forgotten it yet. ¶ Joseph . . . the clergy; . . . Politic, . . . yet. ¶ Joseph . . . the priests; . . . Thought Politic, . . . yet. inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over no ¶ Joseph . . . the priests; the clergy; . . . Politic, . . . yet. no ¶ Joseph . . . the clergy; . . . Politic, . . yet. No, I thank you cordially and in all sincerity, but I am afraid to come, I must not venture to come, for I am sensitive, I am humane, I am tender in my feelings, and I could not bear it if young Mr. Rockefeller, whom I think a great deal of, should get up and go to whitewashing Joseph again. But you have my very best wishes. Mark Twain, Honorary Member of the Bible Class. Mark Twain, Honorary . . . Class. Mark Twain paraph Mark Twain., Honorary Member of the Bible Class. Mark Twain, Honorary Member of the Bible Class. I sent that letter privately to young John himself, and asked him to make himself perfectly free with it, and please suppress it if it seemed to him improper matter to be read in a church. He suppressed it—which shows that he has a level Standard Oil head notwithstanding his theology. Then he asked me to go to the meeting of honoraries and talk and said I might choose my own subject and talk freely. He suggested a subject which he had been experimenting with himself before his Bible Class, a couple of months ago—lying. The subject suited me very well. I had read the newspaper reports of his discourse and had perceived that he was like all the other pulpits. He knew nothing valuable about lying; that, like all other pulpits, he imagines that there has been somebody upon this planet, at some time or other, who was not a liar; that he imagines like all other pulpits——however I have treated this matter in one of my books, and it is not necessary to treat it again in this place. It was agreed that young John is to call at the house day after to-morrow evening and take me to his church, I to be free to talk about lying, if I like, or talk upon some freshly interesting subject instead, in case there should be a person there capable of starting a fresh subject in such an atmosphere. But, after all, I can’t go. I am fighting off my annual bronchitis, and the doctor has forbidden it. I am sorry, for I am sure I know more about lying than anybody who has lived on this planet before me. I believe I am the only person alive who is sane upon this subject. I have been familiar with it for seventy years. The first utterance I ever made was a lie, for I pretended that a pin was sticking me, whereas it was not so. I have been interested in this great art ever since. I have practised practised practiced it ever since; sometimes for pleasure, usually for profit. And to this day I do not always know when to believe myself, and when to take the matter under consideration. I shall be unspeakably sorry if the bronchitis catches me, for that will mean six weeks in bed—my annual tribute to it for the last sixteen years. I shall be sorry because I want to be in condition to appear at Carnegie Hall on the night of April 10th and take my permanent leave of the platform. I never intend to lecture for pay again, and I think I shall never lecture again where the audience has paid to get in. I shall go on talking, but it will be for fun, not money. I can get lots of it to do. My first appearance before an audience was forty years ago, in San Francisco. If I live to take my farewell in Carnegie Hall on the night of the 10th, I shall see, and see constantly, what no one else in that house will see. I shall see two vast audiences—the San Francisco audience of forty years ago and the one which will be before me at that time. I shall see that early audience with as absolute distinctness in every detail as I see it at this moment, and as I shall see it while looking at the Carnegie audience. I am promising myself a great, a consuming pleasure, on that Carnegie night, and I hope that the bronchitis will leave me alone and let me enjoy it. General Fred Grant sent a gentleman over here a week ago to offer me a thousand dollars to deliver a talk for the benefit of the Robert Fulton Memorial Memorial Monument Association of which he is the President and I Vice-President. This was the very thing, and I accepted at once, and said I would without delay write some telegrams and letters from Fred Grant to myself and sign his name to them, and I would answer those telegrams and letters and sign my name to them, and in this way we could make a good advertisement and I could thus get the fact before the public that I was now delivering my last and final platform talk for money. I wrote the correspondence at once. General Grant approved it, and I here insert it. PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. [Correspondence.] [Correspondence.] Correspondence. (Correspondence.) Telegram. Telegram. 3 boxes—anywhere. Telegram. Telegram. Headquarters Department of the East, Governors Island, New York. Headquarters . . . East, . . . New York. Army Headquarters (date) Headquarters . . . East . . . New York. Mark Twain, New York. Mark Twain, New York. Mark Twain, New York. Mark Twain, New York. Would you consider a proposal to talk at Carnegie Hall for the benefit benefit Robert benefit benefit of the Robert Fulton Memorial Memorial Monument Memorial Association, of which you are a Vice-President Vice-President Vice President , for a fee of a thousand dollars? F. D. Grant, Grant, Grant, F paraph Grant, President Fulton Memorial Association. President Fulton Memorial Association. President Fulton Monument Association. President, Fulton Memorial Association. Telegraphic Answer. Telegraphic Answer. Telegraphic Answer. Telegraphic Answer. Major General F. D. Grant, Headquarters Department of the East, Governors Island, New York. Major General . . . New York. Major General F. D. Grant, Army Headquarters. Major General . . . New York. I shall be glad to do it, but I must stipulate that you keep the thousand dollars and add it to the Memorial Fund Memorial Fund Monument Fund and add it to the Fund Memorial Fund as my contribution. contribution. contribution contribution. Clemens. Clemens. Clemens. paraph Clemens. Letters. Letters. Letters. double rule Letters. rule Dear Mr. Clemens: You no ¶ Dear Mr. Clemens: no ¶ You ¶ Dear Mr. Clemens: no ¶ You no ¶ Dear Mr. Clemens: ¶ You have the thanks of the Association, and the terms shall be as you say. But why give all of it? Why not reserve a portion—why should you do this work wholly without compensation? Truly Yours Fred D. Grant. Truly Yours Fred D. Grant Truly Yours Fred. D. Grant. paraph Truly yours, Fred D. Grant. Yours truly, Fred D. Grant. Major Major General Major Major General Grant, Grant, Grant:, Grant, Headquarters Department of the East. Headquarters . . . East. Army Headquarters. Headquarters . . . East. Dear General: Because no ¶ Because no ¶ Because ¶ Because I stopped talking for pay pay m pay pay a good many years ago, and I could not resume the habit now without a great deal of personal discomfort. I love to hear myself talk, because I get so much instruction and moral upheaval out of it, but I lose the bulk of this joy when I charge for it. Let the terms stand. Let the terms stand. Truly Yours Let the terms stand. Let the terms stand. General, if I have your approval, I wish to use this good good good good occasion to retire permanently from the platform. Truly Yours Truly Yours Truly Yours Truly yours, S. L. Clemens. S. L. Clemens. SL. Clemens paraph S. L. Clemens. Dear Mr. Clemens: Certainly. But as an old friend, permit me to say, Don’t do that. Why should you?—you are not old yet. Yours truly truly truly truly, Fred D. Grant. Fred D. Grant. Fred. D. Grant. paraph Fred D. Grant. Dear General: I mean the pay-platform; I shan’t retire from the gratis-platform until after I am dead and courtesy requires me to keep still and not disturb the others. What shall I talk about? My idea is this: to instruct the audience about Robert Fulton, and. . . . Tell and . . . . Tell and . . . . □ Tell symbol for an em-space and . . . Tell me—was that his real name, or was it his nom de plume? However, never mind, it is not important important impeortant important —I can skip it, it, the thing it, it, and the house will think I knew all about it, but forgot. Could you find out for me if he was one of the Signers Signers Signers signers of the Declaration, and which one? But if it is any any any trouble, never mind any trouble, let it alone, I can skip it. Was he out with Paul Jones? Will you ask Horace Porter? And ask him if he brought both of them home. These home. These home—. □ tThese symbol for an em-space home. These will be very interesting facts, if they can be established. But never mind, don’t trouble Porter, I can establish them anyway. The way I look at it, they are are are just are historical gems—gems of the very first water. gems—gems of the very first water. gems.—gems of the very first water. ¶ I am getting a lot of information about Fulton out of the Barnard students—mainly the freshmen. They tell me everything they know. Do you like freshmen?—that kind, I mean. I do. gems—gems of the very first water. Well, that is my idea, as I have said: first, excite the audience with a spoonful of information about Fulton, then quiet them down with a barrel of illustration drawn by memory from my books—and if you don’t say anything the house will think they never heard of heard of heard of heard it before, because people don’t really read your books, they only say they do, to keep you from feeling bad. Next, excite the house with another spoonful of Fultonian fact. Then tranquillize them again with another barrel of illustration. And so on and so on, all through the evening; and if you are discreet and don’t tell them the illustrations don’t illustrate anything, they won’t notice it and I will send them home as well informed about Robert Fulton as I am myself. Don’t you be afraid; I know all about audiences, they audiences, they audiences, they audiences. They believe everything you say, except when you are telling the truth. Truly Yours S. L. Clemens. Truly Yours S. L. Clemens. Truly Yours Mark Twain S. L. Clemens. paraph Truly yours, S. L. Clemens. P. S. Mark all the advertisements “Private “Private “Private” “Private and Confidential Confidential Confidential Confi-dential ‘dential’ underscored, correcting the typist’s error ,” otherwise the people will not read them. M. T. Dear Dear Mr. S. L. Clemens Dear Dear Mr. Clemens: How long shall you talk? I ask in order that we may be able to be able to be able to be able to say when carriages may be called. Very Truly Yours Very Truly Yours Very Truly Yours Very truly yours, Hugh Gordon Miller. Miller. Miller Miller. Secretary. Dear Dear double rule Dear Dear Mr. Miller: I cannot say for sure. It is my custom to keep on talking till I get the audience I get the audience I get the audience are I get the audience cowed. Sometimes it takes an hour hour hour, hour and fifteen minutes, sometimes I can do it in an hour. Sincerely Yours Sincerely Yours Sincerely Yours Sincerely yours, S. L. Clemens. S. L. Clemens. S L. Clemens paraph # S. L. Clemens Mem. My charge is two boxes free. Not the choicest—sell the choicest, and give me any six-seat boxes you please. SLC I want Fred Grant (in uniform) on the stage; also the rest of the officials of the Association; also other distinguished people—all the attractions we can get. Also, a seat for Mr. Albert Bigelow Paine, who may be useful to me if he is near me and on the front. SLC Mem . . . two . . . six-seat boxes . . . a . . . Albert . . . SLC Mem . . . 2 . . . 6-seat boxes . . . a◇ a . . . Alfred . . . SLC paraph Paine corrected his own name not in Private and Confidential. flush left Private and Confidential. flush left Private and Confidential. centered Private and Confidential. At Carnegie Hall (put in the the the not in date) MR. MARK TWAIN MR. MARK TWAIN Mr. MARK TWAIN capitals simulated MR. MARK TWAIN will take PERMANENT LEAVE PERMANENT LEAVE PERMANENT LEAVE capitals simulated PERMANENT LEAVE (very large) of the platform (very small type) Proceeds to go to the Robert Fulton Memorial Memorial Monument Memorial Fund. Tickets Tickets Admission Tickets Tickets $ . . . . obtainable obtainable obtainable Obtainable at . . . . and at . . . . boxes will be sold by auction boxes will be sold by auction boxes will be sold by auction small capitals simulated BOXES WILL BE SOLD BY AUCTION at . . . . . . . on (date) INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC capitals simulated INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC preceding the talk. talk. talk. vertical rule Please put this in the program. S. L. C. (MS) talk vertical rule Please put this in the program. S.L.C. talk At 8.40 8.40 78.340 8.40 INTERMISSION INTERMISSION INTERMISSION capitals simulated INTERMISSION of 10 minutes minutes minutes (with instrumental music minutes (with instrumental music. minutes.