6 April 1906 Friday, April April March April April 6, 1906 Mr. Clemens’s present house unsatisfactory because of no sunshine—Mr. Clemens meets Etta in Washington Square Square Sq. —Recalls ball-room in Virginia City forty-four forty-four 44 years ago—Orion resumed; he invents wood-sawing machine; invents steam canal-boat; his funny experience in bath-tub—Bill Nye’s story—Orion’s autobiography—His death. This house is No. 21 Fifth Avenue, and stands on the corner of 9th street street Street within a couple of couple of couple of couple of hundred yards of Washington Square. It was built fifty or sixty years ago by Renwick, the architect of the Roman Catholic Cathedral. It is large, and every story has good and spacious rooms. Something more than a year ago, Clara and Katy Katy Katie Katy , (the housekeeper,) (the housekeeper,) (the housekeeper,) (the housekeeper,) examined it and greatly liked it. They did not superficially examine it, but examined it in detail, and the more they searched it the better they liked it. It was then my turn to act, and instead of taking it for a year, with an option or two, I took it for three years and signed the contract. We put the furniture in, then moved in ourselves, and made a discovery straightway. There was not a window in the whole house, either on the Fifth Avenue front or on the long 9th street 9th street Ninth Street side, side, side that had ever known what a ray of sunshine was like. It was a bad business, and too late to correct it. The entire house is in shadow at all seasons of the year except dead summertime. The sun gets in then, but as there wouldn’t ever be anybody in the house at that time of the year, it is no advantage. Nobody thrives in this house. Nobody profits by our sojourn in it except the doctors. They seem to be here all the time. We must move out and find a house with some sunshine in it. This . . . in it. This . . . in it. This . . . in it. marked and queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC note that within the entries through 23.36, the readings of TS2 are not represented as canceled Yesterday I went down to Washington Square, turned out to the left to look at a house house house house, advertised for rent, house advertised for rent, that stands on the corner of the Square and University Place. Presently I stepped over to the corner of the Square to take a general look at the frontage of the house. While crossing the street I met a woman, woman, woman, woman, lady, lady, and was conscious that she recognized me, and it seemed to me that there was something in her face that was familiar to me. I had the instinct that she would turn and follow me and speak to me, and the instinct was right. She was a fat little woman, with was a fat little woman, with was a fat little woman, with was a fat little woman, with had had a gentle and kindly but aged and homely and homely and homely and homely not in face, and she had white hair, and was neatly but poorly dressed. She said, said, said said, “Aren’t you Mr. Clemens?” “Yes,” I said, said, said said, said, “I am.” She said, said, said said, said, “Where is your brother Orion?” “Dead,” I said. “Where is his wife?” “Dead,” I said; said; said,; comma mended to a semicolon said; and added, added, added, added, “I seem to know you, but I cannot place you.” She said “Do you remember Etta Booth?” Etta Booth?” Etta?” Booth?” Etta Booth?” Lettie E Hattie Edwards?” ‘Lettie E’ rubbed out and overwritten with ‘Hattie Edwards?” ’ Hattie Edwards?” I had known only one Etta Booth Etta Booth Etta Booth Etta Booth Hattie Edwards Hattie Edwards in my lifetime, and that one one Etta Etta one one rose before me in an instant, and vividly. It was almost as if she stood alongside of this fat little fat little fat little fat little small small antiquated dame in the bloom and diffidence and sweetness of her thirteen years, her hair in plaited plaited platited plaited braids braids tails tails braids braids down her back and her fire-red fire-red fiery red fiery fire-red fire-red frock stopping short at her knees. Indeed I remembered Etta Etta Etta Etta Hattie Hattie very well. And immediately another vision rose before me, me, me, me, with that child in the centre centre center centre of it and accenting its sober tint like a torch with her red frock. But it was not a quiet vision; not a reposeful one. The scene was a great ball-room in some ramshackle building in Gold Hill or Virginia City, Nevada. There were two or three hundred stalwart men present and dancing with cordial energy. And in the midst of the turmoil Etta’s Etta’s Etta’s Etta’s Hattie’s Hattie’s crimson frock was swirling and flashing; and she was the only dancer of her sex on the floor. Her mother, large, fleshy, pleasant and smiling, sat on a bench against the wall in lonely and honored state and watched the festivities in placid contentment. She and Etta Etta Etta Etta Hattie Hattie were the only persons of their sex in the ball-room. Half of the men represented ladies, and they had a handkerchief tied around the left arm so that they could be told from the men. I did not dance with Etta, Etta, Etta, Etta, Hattie, Hattie, for I was a lady myself. I wore a revolver in my belt, and so did all the other ladies—likewise the gentlemen. It was a dismal old barn of a place, and was lighted from end to end by tallow-candle chandeliers made of barrel-hoops suspended from the ceiling, and the grease dripped all over us. That was in the beginning of the winter of 1862. 1862 1862 (1862) typed in the margin (1862.) inset It has taken forty-four years for Etta Etta Etta Etta Hattie Hattie to cross my orbit again. I asked after her father. “Dead,” she said. I asked after her mother. “Dead,” she said. Another question brought out the fact that she had long been married, but had no children. We shook hands and parted. She walked three or four steps, then turned and came back, and her eyes filled, and she said, “I said, [¶] “I said:; ¶ “I colon mended to a semicolon said, [¶] “I am a stranger here, here, here, here, and far from my friends—in fact I have hardly any friends left. Nearly all of them are dead. I must tell my news to you. I must must must ‘must’ underscored must tell it to somebody. I can’t bear it by myself, while it is so new. The doctor has just told me that my husband can live only a very little while, and I was not dreaming it was so bad as this.” this.” this.” this.” Yesterday . . . as this.” Yesterday . . . as this.” Yesterday . . . as this.” queried by an NAR editor for possible omission; boxed by SLC, with marginal comment: ‘Strike out these paragraphs.’] note that within the entries through 25.2, the readings of NAR 12pf are not represented as canceled Orion Resumed. Orion Resumed. Orion resumed. ‘Orion resumed.’ underscored Orion resumed. rule Orion resumed. I think the poultry experiment lasted about about only only about about a year, possibly two years. It had then cost me six thousand dollars. It is my impression that Orion was not able to give the farm away, and that his father-in-law took it back as a kindly act of self-sacrifice. It is . . . away, . . . self-sacrifice. It is . . . away, . . . self-sacrifice. It is . . . away, . . . self-sacrifice. queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC not in Orion returned to the law business, and I suppose he remained in that harness off and on for the succeeding quarter of a century, but so far as my knowledge goes he was only a lawyer in name, and had no clients. My mother died, in her eighty-eighth year, 1890 1890 (1890) typed in the margin (1890.) inset in the summer of 1890. She had saved some money, money, money, money, and she left it to me, me, me, me, because it had come from me. I gave it to Orion and he said, with thanks, that I had supported him long enough and now he was going to relieve me of that burden, and would also hope to pay back some of that expense, and maybe the whole of it. Accordingly, Accordingly, Accordingly, Accordingly, he proceeded to use up that money in building a considerable addition to the house, with the idea of taking boarders and getting rich. We need not dwell upon this venture. It was another of his failures. His wife tried hard to make the scheme succeed, and if anybody could have made it succeed she would have done it. She was a good woman, and was greatly liked. Her vanity was pretty large and inconvenient, but Her vanity was pretty large and inconvenient, but Her vanity was pretty large and inconvenient, but Her vanity was pretty large and inconvenient, but queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC not in she she she sShe ‘s’ underscored twice to capitalize She had a practical side too, too, too, too, bracketed by Paine for possible omission, then deleted by SLC not in and she would have made that boarding-house lucrative if circumstances had not been against her. Orion had other projects for recouping me, but as they always required capital I stayed stayed staid staid stayed out of them, and and and but but and and they did not materialize. Once he wanted to start a newspaper. It was a ghastly idea, idea, idea, idea, and I squelched it with a promptness that was almost rude. Then he invented a wood-sawing machine and patched it together himself, and he really sawed wood with it. It was ingenious; it was capable; and it would have made a comfortable little fortune for him; but just at the wrong time Providence interfered again. Orion applied for a patent and found that the same machine had already been patented and had gone into business and was thriving. Presently thriving. [¶] Presently thriving. ¶ Presently thriving. [¶] Presently the State of New York offered a fifty-thousand-dollar fifty-thousand-dollar fifty thousand dollar fifty-thousand-dollar prize for a practical method of navigating the Erie Canal with steam canal-boats. Orion worked at that thing two two two for two or three years, invented and completed a method, method, method, method, and was once more ready to reach out and seize upon imminent wealth when somebody pointed out a defect: his defect: his defect. His defect:. Hhis period mended to a colon defect: his steam canal-boat could not be used in the wintertime; wintertime; winter-time,; comma mended to a semicolon winter-time; winter-time; and in the summertime summertime summertime summer-time the commotion its wheels would make in the water would wash away the State of New York on both sides. Innumerable were Orion’s projects for acquiring the means to pay off his his his the debt to me. These projects extended straight through the succeeding thirty years, but in every case they failed. During all those thirty years his his Orion’s Orion’s his his well-established honesty kept him in offices of trust where other people’s money had to be taken care of, but where no salary was paid. He was treasurer of all the benevolent institutions; he took care of the money and other property of widows and orphans; he never lost a cent for anybody, and never made one for himself. Every time he changed his religion the church of his new faith was glad to get him; made him treasurer at once, and at once he stopped the graft and the leaks in that church. He exhibited a facility in changing his political complexion that was a marvel to the whole community. Once the following the following this this the following the following curious thing happened, and he wrote me all about it himself. One morning he was a Republican Republican republican rRepublican Republican , and upon invitation he agreed to make a campaign speech at the Republican mass meeting mass meeting mass meeting mass-meeting that night. He prepared the speech. After luncheon he became a Democrat and agreed to write a score of exciting mottoes to be painted upon the transparencies which the Democrats would carry in their torchlight procession that night. He wrote these shouting Democratic mottoes during the afternoon, and they occupied so much of his time that it was night before he had a chance to change his politics again; so he actually made a rousing Republican campaign speech in the open air while his Democratic transparencies passed by in front of him, to the joy of every witness present. He present. [¶] He present. ¶ He present. [¶] He was a most strange creature—but in spite of his eccentricities he was beloved, all his life, in whatsoever community he lived. And he was also held in high esteem, for at bottom he was a sterling man. Whenever Whenever . . . other way.’ ” Whenever . . . other way.” Whenever . . . other way.” queried by Paine, then deleted by SLC note that within the entries through 26.42, the readings of TS2 are not represented as canceled he had a chance to get into a ridiculous position he was generally competent for that occasion. When he and his wife were living in Hartford, at the time when he was on the staff of the Evening Post, Post, Post, Post, they were boarders and lodgers in a house that was pretty well stocked with nice men and women of moderate means. There was a bath-room that was common to the tribe, and one Sunday afternoon when the rest of the house was steeped in restful repose, repose, repose, repose, Orion thought he would take a bath, and he carried that idea to a more or less successful issue. But he didn’t lock the door. It was his custom, in summer weather, to fill the long bath-tub nearly full of cold water and then get in it on his knees with his nose on the bottom and maintain this pleasant attitude a couple of minutes at a time. A chambermaid came in there, there, there, there, and then she she she not in rushed out and went shrieking through the house, “Mr. house, [¶] “Mr. house, ¶ “Mr. house, [¶] “Mr. Clemens is drowned!” Everybody drowned!” [¶] Everybody drowned.! ” ¶ Everybody Hobby inserted the quotation mark; SLC mended the period to an exclamation point and inserted a paragraph drowned.” [¶] Everybody came flying out of the doors, doors, doors, doors, and Mrs. Clemens rushed by, by, by, by, crying out in agony, “How agony, [¶] “How agony, ¶ “How agony, [¶] “How do you know it is Mr. Clemens?” And Clemens?” [¶] And Clemens?” ¶And Clemens?” [¶] And the chambermaid said, said, said, said, “I don’t.” It reminds me of Bill Nye, poor fellow,—that real humorist, that gentle good soul. Well, he is dead. Peace to his ashes. He was the baldest human being I ever saw. His whole skull was brilliantly shining. It was like a dome with the sun flashing upon it. He had hardly even a fringe of hair. Once somebody admitted astonishment at his extraordinary baldness. “Oh” he said “it is nothing. You ought to see my brother. One brother. no ¶ One brother. no ¶ One brother.” [¶] One day he fell overboard from a ferry-boat and when he came up a woman’s voice broke high over the tumult of frightened and anxious exclamations and said, ‘You said, no ¶ ‘You said, no ¶ “You said, [¶] “You shameless thing! And ladies present! Go down and come up the other way.’ ” About twenty-five years ago—along there somewhere—I suggested suggested wrote and suggested wrote and suggested suggested to Orion that he write an autobiography. I asked him to try to tell the straight truth in it; to refrain from exhibiting himself in creditable attitudes exclusively, and to honorably set down all the incidents of his life which he had found interesting to him, including those which were burned into his memory because he was ashamed of them. I said that this had never been done, and that if he could do it his autobiography would be a most most very most most valuable piece of literature. I said I was offering him a job which I could not duplicate in my own case, but I would cherish the hope that he might succeed with it. I recognize now that I was trying to saddle upon him an impossibility. impossibility. impossibility. impossibility. I have been dictating this autobiography of mine daily for three months; I have thought of fifteen hundred or two thousand incidents in my life which I am ashamed of, of, of, of, but I have not gotten one of them to consent to go on paper yet. I think that that stock will still be complete and unimpaired when I finish these memoirs, these memoirs, this autobiography, this autobiography, these memoirs, these memoirs, if I ever finish them. them. it. it. them. them. I believe that if I should put in all or any of or any of not in or any of or any of those incidents I should should would wshould should be sure to strike them out when I came to revise this book. Orion wrote his autobiography and sent it to me. But great was my disappointment; disappointment; disappointment; disappointment; and my vexation, too. In it he was constantly making a hero of himself, exactly as I should have done and am doing now, and he was constantly forgetting to put in the episodes which placed him in an unheroic light. I knew several incidents of his life which were distinctly and painfully unheroic, but when I came across them in his autobiography they had changed color. They had turned themselves inside out inside out inside-out inside out , and were things to be intemperately proud of. In my dissatisfaction I destroyed a considerable part of that autobiography. But in what remains Miss Lyon has discovered passages Miss Lyon has discovered Miss Lyon has discovered Miss Lyon has discovered there are there are which she finds she finds she finds she finds are are interesting, and I shall quote from them from them these passages from themse passages from them here and there and now and then, then, then, then, as I go along. In my . . . go along. In my . . . go along. bracketed by Paine for possible omission, then brackets canceled by SLC While we were living 1898 1898 (1898) typed in the margin (1898.) inset in Vienna in 1898 a cablegram came from Keokuk announcing Orion’s death. He was seventy-two years old. He had gone down to the kitchen in the early hours of a bitter December morning; he had built the fire, and had then had then thaen had then had then sat down at a table to write something, something, something, something,; comma mended to a semicolon something; and there he died, with the pencil in his hand and resting against the paper in the middle of an unfinished word—an indication that his release from the captivity of a long and troubled and pathetic and and and and unprofitable life was mercifully mercifully not in mercifully mercifully swift and painless. While we . . . and painless. While we . . . and painless. While we . . . and painless. queried for possible omission by an NAR editor, then marked ‘stet’