Closing Words of My Autobiography Closing Words of My Autobiography Words of My Autobiography Words— | # | of my Autobiography. | triple rule Stormfield, Christmas Eve, 11 a.m., 1909. Jean is dead! And so this Autobiography closes here. I had a reason for projecting it, three years ago: that reason that reason it that reason perishes with her. The reason that moved me was a desire to save my copyrights from extinction, so that Jean and Clara would always have a good livelihood from my books after my death. I meant that whenever a book of mine should approach its forty-two-year forty-two-year 42-year limit, it should at once be newly issued, with about 20,000 20,000 320,000 words of Autobiography added to its contents. This would be copyrightable for a term of twenty-eight twenty-eight 28 years and would practically keep the whole book alive during that term. I meant to write 500,000 words of Autobiography, and I did it. That tedious long labor was wasted. Last March Congress added fourteen fourteen 14 years to the forty-two-year forty-two-year 42-year term, and so my oldest book has now about fifteen fifteen 15 years to live. I have no use for that addition, (I am seventy-four years old), (I am seventy-four years old), (I am 74 years old), poor Jean has no use for it now, Clara is happily and prosperously married and has no use for it. Man proposes, Circumstances dispose. Has any one ever tried to put upon paper all the little happenings connected with a dear one—happenings of the twenty-four hours preceding the sudden and unexpected death of that dear one? Would a book contain them? would two books contain them? I think not. They pour into the mind in a flood. They are little little unimportant little things that have been always always always happening every day, and were always so unimportant and easily forgetable before—but now! Now, how different! how precious they are, how dear, how unforgetable, how pathetic, pathetic, holy, pathetic, how sacred, how clothed with dignity! Last night Jean, all flushed with splendid health; and I the same, from the wholesome effects of the wholesome effects of the wholesome effects of my Bermuda holiday, strolled hand in hand from the dinner table and sat down in the library and chatted, and planned, and discussed, cheerily and happily (and how unsuspectingly!) until nine nine 9 ,—which is late for us—then went up stairs, Jean’s friendly German dog following. At my door Jean Jean she Jean said, “I can’t kiss you good night good night good-night , father: I have a cold, and you could catch it.” I bent and kissed her hand. She was moved—I saw it in her eyes—and she it in her eyes—and she it—and in her eyes—and she impulsively kissed my hand in return. Then with the usual gay gay cheery gay “Sleep well, dear!” from both, we parted. At half past seven seven 7 this morning I woke, and heard voices outside my door. I said to myself, “Jean is starting on her usual horseback-flight to the station for the mail.” Then Katy entered, stood quaking and gasping at my bedside a moment, then found her tongue: “Miss Jean is dead!” Possibly I know now what the the a the soldier feels feels felels when a bullet crashes through his heart. In her bath-room bath-room bath room there she lay, the the str the fair young creature, stretched upon the floor and covered with a sheet. And looking so placid, so natural, and as if asleep. We knew what had happened. She was an epileptic: she had been seized seized siezed with a convulsion and could not get out of the tub. There There She There was no help near, and she was drowned. The doctor had to come several miles. His efforts, like our previous ones, like our previous ones, like our previous ones, failed to bring her back to life. life. life. —as had been the result of It is noon, now. How lovable she looks, how sweet and how tranquil! It is a noble face, and full of dignity; and that was a good heart that lies there so still. In England, thirteen years ago, my wife and I were stabbed to the heart with a cablegram which said “Susy was mercifully released to-day.” I had had have had to send a like shock to Clara, in Berlin, this morning. With the peremptory peremptory peremptory addition, “You must not come home.” Clara and her husband sailed from here on the 11th of this month. How will Clara bear it? Jean, from her babyhood, was a worshipper of Clara. Four days ago I came back from a month’s holiday in Bermuda in perfected health; but by some accident the reporters failed to perceive this. Day before yesterday, letters and telegrams and telegrams and telegrams began to arrive from friends and strangers which indicated that I was supposed to be dangerously ill. Yesterday Jean begged me to explain my case through the Associated Press. I said it was not important enough; but she was distressed and said I must think of Clara. Clara would see the report in the German papers, and as she had been nursing her husband day and night for four months and was worn out and and and feeble, the shock might be disastrous. There was reason in that; so I sent a humorous paragraph by telephone to the Associated Press denying the “charge” that I was “dying,” and saying “I would not do such a thing at my time of life.” Jean wa a a s a little troubled, and did not like to see me treat the matter so lightly; but I said it was best to treat it so, for there was nothing serious about it. This morning I sent the sorrowful facts of this day’s irremediable disaster to the Associated Press. Will both appear in this evening’s papers?—the one so blithe, the other so tragic. I lost Susy thirteen years ago; I lost her mother—her incomparable mother!—five and a half years ago; Clara has gone away to live in Europe; and now I have lost Jean. How poor I am, who was once so rich! How poor I am, who was once so rich! How poor I am, who was once so rich! Seven months ago Mr. Rogers died— died— died— the best friend I ever had, and the nearest perfect, as man and gentleman, I have yet met among my race; within the past four weeks Gilder has passed away, and Laffan—old, old friends of mine. Jean lies yonder, I sit here; we are strangers under our own roof; we kissed hands good-bye at this door last night—and it was forever, we never suspecting it. She lies there, and I sit here—writing, busying myself, to keep my heart from breaking. How dazzlingly the sunshine is flooding the hills around! It is like a mockery. Seventy-four years old, twenty-four days ago. Seventy-four years old yesterday. Who can estimate my age to-day? I have looked upon her again. I wonder I can bear it. She looks just as her mother looked when she lay dead in that Florentine villa so long ago. The sweet placidity of death! it is more beautiful than sleep. I saw her her here mother buried. I said I would never endure that horror again; that I would never again look into the grave of any one dear to me. I have kept to that. They will take Jean from this house to-morrow, and bear her to Elmira, New York, New York, New York, where lie those of us that have been released, but I shall not follow. Jean was on the dock when the ship came in, only four days ago. She was at the door, beaming a welcome, when I reached this house the next evening. We played cards, and she tried to teach me a new game called “Mark Twain.” We sat chatting cheerily in the library last night, and she wouldn’t let me look into the loggia, where she was making Christmas preparations. She said she would finish them in the morning, and then her little French friend would arrive from New York—the surprise would follow; the surprise she had been working over for days. While she was out for a moment I disloyally stole a look. The loggia floor was clothed with rugs and furnished with chairs and sofas; and the uncompleted surprise was there: in the form of a Christmas tree that was drenched with silver films in a most wonderful way; and on a table was a prodigal profusion of bright things which she was going to hang upon it to-day. What desecrating hand will ever banish banish touch banish that eloquent unfinished surprise from that place? surprise from that place? surprise? from that place? Not mine, surely. All these little matters have happened in the last four days. “Little.” Yes—then. But not now. Nothing she said or thought or did, is little, now. And And All And all the lavish humor!—what is become of it? It is pathos, now. Pathos, and the thought of it brings tears. All these little things happened such a few hours ago—and now she lies yonder. Lies yonder, and cares for nothing any more. Strange—marvelous—incredible! I have had this experience before; but it would still be incredible if I had had it a thousand times. “Miss Jean is dead!” That is what Katy said. When I heard the door open behind the bed’s head without a preliminary knock, I supposed it was Jean coming to kiss me good morning, she being the only person who was used to entering without formalities. And so— I have been to Jean’s parlor. Such a turmoil of Christmas presents for servants and friends for servants and friends for servants and friends ! They are everywhere; tables, chairs, sofas, the floor—everything is occupied, and over-occupied over-occupied over-occupied . It is many many thirty y many and many a year since I have seen the like. In that ancient day Mrs. Clemens and I used to slip softly into the nursery at midnight on Christmas Eve and look the array of presents over. The children were little, then. And now here is Jean’s parlor looking just as that nursery used to look. The presents are not labeled—the hands are forevermore idle that would have labeled them to-day. Jean’s mother always worked herself down with her Christmas preparations. Jean did the same yesterday and the preceding days, and the fatigue fatigue fatigues has cost her her life. The fatigue caused the convulsion that attacked her this morning. She had had no attack for months. Jean was so full of life and energy that she was constantly in danger of overtaxing her strength. Every morning she was in the saddle by half past seven seven 7 , and off to the station for the mail. She examined the letters and I I I distributed them: some to her, some to Mr. Paine, the others to the stenographer and myself. She dispatched her share and then mounted her horse again and went around superintending her farm and her poultry the rest of the day. Sometimes she played billiards with me after after a litt after dinner, but she was usually too tired to play, and went early to bed. Yesterday afternoon afternoon afternoon I told her about some plans I had been devising while absent in Bermuda, to lighten her burdens. We would get a housekeeper; also we would put her share of the secretary-work into Mr. Paine’s hands. No—she wasn’t willing. She had been making plans herself. The matter ended in a compromise. I submitted. I always did. She wouldn’t audit the bills and let Paine fill out the checks—she would continue to attend to that herself. Also, she would continue to be housekeeper, and let Katy assist. Also, she would continue to continue to continue to answer the letters of personal friends for me. Such was the compromise. Both of us called it by that name, though I was not able to see where any formidable formidable formidable change had been made. However, Jean was pleased, and that was sufficient for me. She was proud of being my secretary, and I was never able to persuade persuade persudade her to give up any part of her share in that unlovely work. I paid her the compliment of saying she was the only honest and honorable secretary I had ever had, except Paine. Paine. Paine. Then I remarked—more or less casually—that I had never had a secretary who could be persuaded to furnish me a statement of my affairs, either weekly, monthly, quarterly, annually, biennially, or even centennially. This was placing her among the lazy and unprincipled shirks who had preceded her, and was not fair, for she was high-principled and never lazy, but she did not rebuke me, for she knew I was only chaffing her. She not only did not rebuke me, but began a pleading and compassionate defence of the particular secretary I was referring to. It almost angered me, but I am glad now to remember that almost the last act of her life was to defend a creature who had shamelessly plotted against her welfare and her happiness for years. It is true that Jean had furnished me no statements, but I said I said I said I hadn’t ever wanted them from her, for she was honest, and the lack of them had never caused me any uneasiness. Oh, that unfortunate conversation! Unwittingly I was adding to her fatigues, and she was already so tired. Before night she suspended her Christmas labors, and drew drew made me drew up a detailed detailed c◇ detailed statement for November, and placed it in my hands. I said, “Oh, Jean, why did you do it? didn’t you know I was only chaffing?” But she was full of the matter, and eager to show me that her administration had been care-taking and economical. The figures confirmed her words. In the talk last night I said I found everything going so smoothly that if she were willing I would go back to Bermuda in February and get blessedly out of the clash and turmoil again for another month. She was urgent that I should do it, and said that if I would put off the trip until March she would take Katy and go with me. We struck hands upon that, and said it was settled. I had a mind to write to Bermuda by to-morrow’s to-morrow’s tomorrow’s ship and secure a furnished furnished ho furnished house and servants. I meant to write the letter this morning. But it will never be written, now. For she lies yonder, and before her is another journey than that. Night is closing down; the rim of the sun barely shows above the skyline of the hills. I have been looking at that face again that was growing dearer and dearer to me every day. I was getting acquainted with Jean in these last nine nine six nine months. She had been long an exile from home when she came came was released came to us three-quarters of three-quarters of half three-quarters of a year ago. She had been shut up in sanitariums, many miles from us. How eloquently glad and grateful and grateful and grateful she was to cross her father’s threshold again! Would I bring her back to life if I could do it? I would not. If a word would do it, I would beg for strength to withhold the word. And I would have the strength; I am sure of it. In her loss I am almost almost almost bankrupt, and my life is a bitterness, but I am content: for I am content: for I am content: for she has been enriched with the most precious of all gifts—that gift which makes all other gifts mean and poor—death. I have never wanted any released friend of mine restored to life since I reached manhood. I felt in this way when Susy passed away away aw away ; and later my wife; and later Mr. Rogers. When Clara met me at the station in New York and told me Mr. Rogers had died suddenly that morning, my thought was, Oh, favorite of fortune—fortunate all his long and lovely life—fortunate —fortunate all his long and lovely life—fortunate —fortunate all his long and lovely life——fortunate to his latest moment! The reporters The reporters The reporters said there were tears of sorrow in my eyes. True—but they were for me, not for him. He had suffered no loss. All the fortunes he had ever made before were poverty compared with this one. said there were tears of sorrow . . . this one. said there were tears of sorrow . . . this one. inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over Why did I build this house, two years ago? To shelter this vast emptiness? How foolish I was. How foolish I was. How foolish I was. But I shall stay in it. The spirits of the dead hallow a house, for me. It was not so with other other tho other members of my family. Susy died in the house we built in Hartford. Mrs. Clemens would never enter it again. But it made the house dearer to me. I have entered it once since, when it was tenantless and silent and forlorn, but to me it was was was a holy place and beautiful. It seemed to me that the spirits of the dead were all about me, and would speak to me and welcome me if they could: Livy, and Susy, and George, and Henry Robinson, and Charles Dudley Warner. How good and kind they were, and how lovable their lives! In fancy In fancy In fancy I could see them all again, I could call the children back and hear them romp again with George—that peerless black ex-slave ex-slave soul ex-slave and children’s idol who who whom came one day—a flitting stranger—to wash windows, and stayed eighteen years. Until he died. Clara and Jean would never enter again the New York hotels hotels hotels which their mother had frequented in earlier days. They could not bear it. But I shall stay in this house. this house. this. house. It is dearer to me to-night than ever it was before. Jean’s spirit will make it beautiful for me always. Her lonely and tragic death—but I will not think of that, now. Jean’s mother always devoted two or three weeks to Christmas shopping, and was always physically exhausted when Christmas Eve came. Jean was her very very very own child—she wore herself out present-hunting in New York these latter days. Paine has just found in her desk a long list of names—fifty, he thinks—people to whom she sent presents last night. Apparently she forgot no one. And Katy found there a roll of bank notes, for the servants. Also two books of signed checks which I gave her when I went to Bermuda. She had had had used half of them. Her dog has been wandering about the grounds to-day, comradeless and forlorn. I have seen him from the windows. I have seen him from the windows. I have seen him from the windows. She got him from Germany. He has tall ears and looks exactly like a wolf. He was educated in Germany, and knows no language but the German. Jean gave him no orders save in that tongue. And so, when the burglar alarm burglar alarm burglar-alarm made a fierce clamor at midnight a fortnight ago, the butler, who is French and knows no German, tried to interest the dog in the supposed burglar. He remembered two or three of Jean’s German commands (without knowing their meaning), and he shouted them to the eager dog. “Leg’ Dich!” (lie down!) The dog obeyed—to the butler’s distress. “Sei ruhig!” (be still!) The dog stretched himself on the floor, and even stopped batting the floor with his tail. Then Jean came running, in her night clothes, and shouted “Los!” (go go Go ! fly! rush!) and the dog sped away like the wind, tearing the silences to tatters with his bark. Jean Jean Ju Jean wrote me, to Bermuda, about the incident. It was the last letter I was ever to receive from her bright head and her competent hand. The dog will not be neglected. The dog will not be neglected. The dog will not be neglected. Paine has come in to say the reporters want photographs of Jean. He has found some proofs in her desk—excellent ones, and evidently not a fortnight fortnight week fortnight old. This is curiously fortunate, for she has not been photographed before for more than a year. There was never a kinder heart than Jean’s. From her childhood up she always spent the most of her allowance on charities of one kind and another. After After Since After she became secretary and had her income doubled she spent her money upon these things with a free hand. Mine too, I am glad and grateful to say. She was a loyal friend to all animals, and she loved them all, birds, beasts and everything—even snakes—an inheritance from me. She knew all the birds; she was high up in that lore. She became a member of various humane societies when she was still a little girl—both here and abroad—and she remained an active member to the last. She founded two or three two or three one or two or three societies for the protection of animals, here here in Italy here and in Europe. She was an embarrassing secretary, for she fished my correspondence out of the waste-basket waste-basket wastebasket and answered the letters. She thought all letters deserved the courtesy of an answer. Her mother brought her up in that kindly error. She could write a good letter, and was swift with her pen. She had but an indifferent ear for music, but her tongue took to languages with an easy facility. She never allowed her Italian, French and German to get rusty through neglect. Her unearned and atrocious malady—epilepsy—damaged her disposition when its influence was upon her, and made her say and do ungentle things; but when the influence passed away her inborn sweetness returned, and then she was wholly lovable. Her disease, and its accompanying awful convulsions, wore out her gentle mother’s strength with grief and watching and anxiety, and caused her death, poor Livy! Livy! Liv Livy! corrected miswriting Jean’s—like her mother’s—was a fine character; there is no finer. The telegrams of of are of sympathy are flowing in, from far and wide, now, now, now, just as they did in Italy Italy Florence Italy five years and a half ago, when this child’s mother laid down her her her blameless life. They cannot heal the hurt, but they take away some of the pain. When Jean and I kissed hands and parted at my door last, how little did we we we imagine that that thant in twenty-two hours the telegraph would be bringing me words like these! “From the bottom of our hearts we send our sympathy, dearest of men and dearest of friends.” For many and many a day to come, to come, to come, wherever I go in this house, remembrancers of Jean will mutely speak to me of her. me of her. me. of her. Who can count the number of them? She was an exile so long, so long! There are no words to express how grateful I am that she did not meet her fate in the house of a stranger, but in the loving shelter of her own home. home. home.! “Miss Jean is dead!” It is true. Jean is dead. dead. dead. God rest her sweet spirit! A month ago I was writing bubbling and hilarious articles articles magazine articles for magazines yet to appear, and now I am writing—this. this. this. [¶] Jean is dead. How strange it sounds. flush right Mark Twain [paraph] [¶] End of the Autobiography. # Christmas Day. Noon. Last night I went to Jean’s room at intervals, and turned back the sheet and looked looked looked and looked at the peaceful face, and kissed the cold brow, and remembered that heart-breaking heart-breaking heart-breaking night in Florence so long ago, in that cavernous and silent vast villa, when I crept down stairs so many times, and turned back a sheet and looked at a face just like this one—Jean’s mother’s face—and kissed a brow that was just like this one. And last night I saw again what I had seen then—that strange and lovely miracle—the sweet soft contours of early maidenhood restored by the gracious hand of death! When Jean’s mother lay dead, all trace of care, and trouble, and suffering, and the corroding years had vanished out of the face, and I was looking again upon it it the face it as I had known it and worshiped worshiped worshipped it in its young bloom and beauty a whole generation before. before. rule before. inserted rule About three three 3 in the morning, while while I went while wandering about the house in the deep silences, as one does in times like these, when there is a dumb sense that something has been lost that will never will never cannot will never be found again, yet must be sought, if only for the employment the useless seeking gives, I came upon Jean’s dog in the hall down stairs, and noted noted noted two things: several that he did not spring to greet me, according to his hospitable habit, but came slow and sorrowfully; also I remembered also I remembered and also I remembered that he had not visited Jean’s apartment since the tragedy. Poor fellow, did he know? I think so. Always when Jean was abroad in the open he was with her; always when she was in the house he was with her, in the night as well as in the day. Her parlor was was was in his bedroom. Whenever I happened upon him on the ground floor he always followed me about, and when I went up stairs he went too—in a tumultuous gallop. But now it was different: after petting him a little I went to the library—he remained behind; when I went up stairs he did not follow me, save with his wistful eyes. He has wonderful eyes—big, and kind, and eloquent. He can talk with them. He is a beautiful creature, and is of the breed of the New York police-dogs. police-dogs. police-dogs. He is from Germany, and was educated there. I do not like dogs, because they bark when there is no occasion for it; but I have liked this one from the beginning, because he belonged to Jean, and because he never barks except when there is occasion—which is not oftener than twice a week. In my wanderings I visited Jean’s parlor. On a shelf I found a pile of my books, and I knew what it meant. She was waiting for me to come home from Bermuda and autograph them, then she would send them away. If I only knew whom she intended them for! But I shall never know. I will I will I will keep them. Her hand has touched them—it is an accolade—they are noble, now. keep them . . . noble, now. keep them. Her hand has touched them—it is an accolade—they are noble, now. inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over And in a closet she had hidden a surprise for me—a thing I have often wished I owned: a noble big globe. I couldn’t see it for the tears. She will never know the pride I take in it, and the pleasure. To-day the mails are full of loving remembrances for her; full of those old, old kind words she loved so well, “Merry Christmas to Jean!” If she could only have have have lived one day longer! At last she ran out of money, and would not use mine. So she sent to one of those New York homes for poor girls all the clothes she could spare—and more, most likely. Christmas Night. This afternoon they took her away from her room. As soon as I might, I went down to the library, and there she lay, in her coffin, dressed in exactly the same clothes she wore when she stood at the other end of the same room on the 6th of October last, as Clara’s chief bridesmaid. Her face was radiant with happy excitement then; it was the same face now, with the dignity of death and the peace of God upon it. They told me the first mourner to come was the dog. He came uninvited, and stood up on his hind legs and rested his forepaws upon the trestle, and took a long last look at the face that was so dear to him, then went his way as silently as he had come. He knows. At mid-afternoon it began to snow. The pity of it—that Jean could not see it! She so loved the snow. The snow continued to fall. At six o’clock the hearse drew up to the door to bear drew up to the door to bear bore drew up to the door to bear away its pathetic burden, Paine Paine Payne playing Schubert’s “Impromptu,” which was Jean’s favorite. Then he played the “Intermezzo” “Intermezzo” Intermezzo ; that was for Susy; then he played the “Largo” “Largo” Largo : that was for their mother. He did this at my request. Elsewhere in this Autobiography I have told how the “Intermezzo” “Intermezzo” Intermezzo and the “Largo” “Largo” Largo came to be associated, be associated, be associated, me in my heart, in my heart, in my heart, with Susy and Livy in Livy in Livy, and in their last hours in this life. From my windows I saw the hearse the hearse the car the hearse and the carriages wind along the road and gradually grow vague and spectral in the falling snow, and presently disappear. Jean was gone out of my life, and would not come back any more. The cousin she had played with when they were babies together—he and her beloved old Katy—were conducting together—he and her beloved old Katy—were conducting together was con- —he and her beloved old Katy—were con-ducting her to her distant childhood home, where she will lie by her mother’s side once more, in the company of Susy and Langdon. Langdon. Langdon. [¶] Why did I not go? I saw the mother buried. I believed, then, I could never endure again the heart-break of seeing any one dear to me put under the ground. And it was true. December 26. The dog came to see me at eight eight 8 o’clock o’clock o’clock, when I was breakfasting in bed. this morning. He was very affectionate, poor orphan! My room will be his quarters hereafter. The storm raged all night. It has raged all the morning. The snow drives across the landscape in vast clouds, superb, sublime— sublime— sublime,— and Jean not here to see. see. rule see. inserted rule 2.30 p.m. It is the time appointed. The funeral has begun. Four hundred miles away, but I can see it all, just as if I were there. The scene is the library, in the Langdon homestead. Jean’s coffin stands stands rests stands where her mother and I stood, forty years ago, and were married; and where Susy’s coffin stood thirteen thirteen nearly fourteen thirteen years years year’s ago; where where and where her mother’s stood, five years and a half ago; and where mine will stand, after a little time. Five o’clock. It is all over. When Clara went away away away, two weeks ago ago ago, to live in Europe, it was hard, but I could bear it, for I had Jean left. I said we would be a family. We said we would be close comrades and happy—just we two. That fair dream was in my mind when Jean met me at the steamer last Monday; it was in my mind when she received me at this door last Tuesday evening. We were together; we were a family! the dream had come true—oh, preciously true, contentedly contentedly satis contentedly true, satisfyingly true! and remained true two whole days. And now? Now, Now, Now, Jean is in the grave! In the grave—if I can believe it. it. it. What shall I do? God rest her sweet spirit! Mark Twain Twain Twain | [paraph] End of the Autobiography.