28 January 1907 Monday, January 28, 1907 Senator Clark of Montana, and the dinner given in his honor at the Union League Club because of his having lent to the club a million dollars’ worth of European pictures. In the middle of the afternoon, day before yesterday, a particular friend of mine, whom I will call Jones for this day and train only, telephoned, and said he would like to call for me at half past half past half-past seven and take me to a dinner at the Union League Club. He said he would send me home as early as I pleased, he being aware that I am declining all invitations this year, and for the rest of my life, that make it necessary for me to go out at night—at least to places where speeches are made and the sessions last until past ten o’clock. But Jones is a very particular friend of mine, and therefore it cost me no discomfort to transgress my rule and accept his invitation; no, I am in error—it did cost me a pang, a decided pang, for although he said that the dinner was a private one, with only ten persons invited, he mentioned Senator Clark of Montana as one of the ten. I am a person of elevated tone, and of morals that can bear scrutiny, and am much above associating with animals of Mr. Clark’s breed. I am sorry to be vain—at least I am sorry to expose the fact that I am vain—but I do confess it and expose it; it; it.; I cannot help being vain of myself for giving such a large proof of my friendship for Jones as is involved in my accepting an invitation to break bread with such a person as Clark of Montana. It is not because he is a United States Senator Senator senator —it is at least not wholly because he occupies that doubtful position—for there are many Senators Senators senators whom I hold in a certain respect, and would not think of declining to meet them socially, if I believed it was the will of God. We have lately sent a United States Senator Senator senator to the penitentiary, but I am quite well aware that of those who have escaped this promotion there are several who are in some regards guiltless of crime—not guiltless of all crimes, for that cannot be said of any United States Senator Senator senator , I think, but guiltless of some kinds of crime. They all rob the Treasury by voting for iniquitous pension bills in order to keep on good terms with the Grand Army of the Republic, and with the Grand Army of the Republic, junior Republic, junior Republic Jr. , and with the Grand Army of the Republic, junior, junior Republic, junior, junior Republic Jr., Jr. , and with other great-grandchildren of the war—and these bills distinctly represent crime, and violated senatorial oaths. However, while I am willing to waive moral rank and associate with the moderately criminal among the Senators Senators senators —even including Platt and Chauncey Depew—I have to draw the line at Clark of Montana. He has bought legislatures and judges as other men buy food and raiment. By his example, he has so excused and so sweetened corruption that, in Montana, it no longer has an offensive smell. His history is known to everybody; he is as rotten a human being as can be found anywhere under the flag; he is a shame to the American nation, and no one has helped to send him to the Senate who did not know that his proper place was the penitentiary, with a chain and ball on his legs. To my mind, he is the most disgusting reptile that the republic has produced since Tweed’s time. I went to the dinner, which was served in a small private room of the club, with the usual piano and fiddlers present to make conversation difficult, and comfort impossible. I found that the Montana criminal was not merely a guest, but that the dinner was given in his honor. While the feeding was going on two of my elbow-neighbors elbow-neighbors elbow neighbors supplied me with information concerning the reasons for this tribute of respect to Mr. Clark. Mr. Clark had lately lent to the Union League Club, which is the most powerful political club in America, and perhaps the richest, a million dollars’ worth of European pictures for exhibition. It was quite plain that my informant regarded this as an act of almost superhuman generosity. One of my informants said, under his breath, and with awe and admiration, that if you should put together all of Mr. Clark’s several generosities to the club, including this gaudy one, the cost to Mr. Clark, first and last, would doubtless amount to a hundred thousand dollars. I saw that I was expected to exclaim, applaud, and adore, but I was not tempted to do it, because I had been informed, five minutes earlier, that Clark’s income, as stated under the worshiping informant’s breath, was thirty million dollars a year. Human beings have no sense of proportion. A benefaction of a hundred thousand dollars subtracted from an income of thirty million dollars, is not a matter to go into hysterics of admiration and adulation about. If I should contribute ten thousand dollars to a cause, it would be one-ninth of my past year’s income, and I could feel it; as matter for admiration, and wonder, and astonishment, and gratitude, it would far and away outrank a contribution of twenty-five million dollars from the Montana jailbird, who would still have a hundred thousand dollars a week left over from his year’s income to subsist upon. It reminded me of the only instance of benevolence exploded upon the world by the late Jay Gould, that I had ever heard of. When that first and most infamous corrupter of American commercial morals was wallowing in uncountable stolen millions, he contributed five thousand dollars for the relief of the stricken population of Memphis, Tennessee, at a time when an epidemic of yellow fever was raging in that city. Mr. Gould’s contribution cost him no sacrifice; it was only the income of the hour which he daily spent in prayer—for he was a most godly man—yet the storm of worshiping gratitude which welcomed it all over the United States, in the newspaper, the pulpit, and in the private circle, might have persuaded a stranger that for a millionaire American to give five thousand dollars to the dead and dying poor—when he could have bought a circuit judge with it—was the noblest thing in American history, and the holiest. In time, the President of the Art Committee of the club rose and began with that aged and long-ago discredited remark that there were not to be any speeches on this occasion, but only friendly and chatty conversation; then he went on, in the ancient and long-ago discredited fashion, and made a speech himself—a speech which was well calculated to make any sober hearer ashamed of the human race. If a stranger had come in at that time he might have supposed that this was a divine service, and that the Divinity was present. He would have gathered that Mr. Clark was about the noblest human being the great republic had yet produced, and the most magnanimous, the most self-sacrificing, the most limitlessly and squanderingly prodigal benefactor of good causes living in any land to-day. And it never occurred to this worshipper worshipper worshiper of money, and money’s possessor, that in effect Mr. Clark had merely dropped a dime into the League’s hat. Mr. Clark couldn’t miss his benefaction any more than he could miss ten cents. When this wearisome orator had finished his devotions, the President of the Union League got up and continued the service in the same vein, vomiting adulations upon that jailbird which, estimated by any right standard of values, were the coarsest sarcasms, although the speaker was not aware of that. Both of these orators had been applauded all along, but the present one ultimately came out with a remark which I judged would fetch a cold silence, a very chilly chill; he revealed the fact that the expenses of the club’s loan exhibition of the Senator’s Senator’s senator’s pictures had exceeded the income from the tickets of admission; then he paused—as speakers always do when they are going to spring a grand effect—and said that at that crucial time Senator Clark stepped forward, of his own motion, and put his hand in his pocket and handed out fifteen hundred dollars wherewith to pay half of the insurance on the pictures, and thus the club’s pocket was saved whole. I wish I may never die, if the worshippers worshippers worshipers present at this religious service did not break out in grateful applause at that astonishing statement; and I wish I may never permanently die, if the jailbird didn’t smile all over his face and look as radiantly happy as he will look some day when Satan gives him a Sunday vacation in the cold-storage cold-storage cold storage vault. Finally, while I was still alive, the President of the club finished his dreary and fatiguing marketing of juvenile commonplaces, and introduced Clark, and sat down. Clark rose to the tune of the “Star-Spangled Banner” “Star-Spangled Banner” Star-Spangled Banner —no, it was “God Save the King,” “God Save the King,” God Save the King, frantically sawed and thumped by the fiddlers and the piano; and this was followed by “For he’s a jolly good fellow,” sung by the whole strength of the happy worshippers worshippers worshipers . A miracle followed. I have always maintained that no man could make a speech with nothing but a compliment for a text, but I know now that a reptile can. Senator Clark twaddled, and twaddled, and twaddled along for a full half hour half hour half-hour with no text but those praises which had been lavished upon his trifling generosities; and he not only accepted at par all these silly praises, but added to them a pile—praising his own so-called generosities and magnanimities with such intensity and color that he took the pigment all out of those other men’s compliments and made them look pallid and shadowy. With forty years’ experience of human assfulness and vanity at banquets, I have never seen anything of the sort that could remotely approach the assfulness and complacency of this coarse and vulgar and incomparably ignorant peasant’s glorification of himself. I shall always be grateful to Jones for giving me the opportunity to be present at these sacred orgies. I had believed that in my time I had seen at banquets all the different kinds of speech-making animals there are, and also all the different kinds of people that go to make our population, but it was a mistake. This was the first time I had ever seen men get down in the gutter and frankly worship dollars, and their possessors. Of course I was familiar with such things, through our newspapers, but I had never before heard men worship the dollar with their mouths, or seen them on their knees in the act. Palm Readings. Palm Readings. (To precede Niblo’s report.) double rule Palm Readings double rule title inserted by Paine This follows dicn Jan. 28 The editor of Harper’s Monthly Harper’s Monthly this periodical Harper’s Monthly Harper’s Monthly has submitted prints of my hands to several New York to several New York to professional to several New York to several New York palmists 1905 1905 1905. boxed on three sides of the first repute, (hiding my name from them, of course), with a view to testing their (hiding . . . their in order to test their (hiding . . . their (hiding . . . their art. Ostensibly that is the idea. This is the second time an editor has tried this plan of getting at supposed concealed places in my character. Mr. Stead tried it nine nine several eleven nine nine years ago. He sent prints of my hands—without revealing my name—to seven English seven English twelve seven English seven English palmists, and published the results. The “readings” “readings” estimates “readings” “readings” were smoothly worded, but cautious, very cautious and wary. Wary, and cleverly indefinite. It could not be denied that they fitted me; but they would have fitted the rest of the human race just as well. The sentences had a deceptively smart look of saying something, but upon examination that apparent something faded out and vanished, like breath from a razor. In the whole accumulation accumulation lot accumulation accumulation there was only only but only only one dead-certain dead-certain def dead-certain dead-certain and absolutely definite assertion—to wit to wit to-wit : “The possessor of these hands is destitute destitute utterly destitute destitute of the sense of humor.” I believed this to be an error. I believed that this chiropodist had something the matter with him. Certainly it was curious, most curious. By reputation—and notoriously—I possessed that missing quality; and not only possessed it, but in in in even in extravagant, exaggerated, and even monstrous bulk; yet my hand, while naïvely naïvely naively giving away all my minor and hardly-discernible characteristics, had been able to entirely hide hide conceal hide hide my sole prominent hump from the watchful expert. It was as if a blind naturalist should feel and name all the little animals in the menagerie and then then then then overlook the elephant. None of the seven palmists found the elephant—full grown. Several of them found him, but only dog-size. An examination of the following estimates of me will show that the New York palmists have overlooked the elephant, too. This persuades me that the human hand is not to be trusted, except in minor matters. I think Shakspeare’s hand would have glibly and frankly given away all of Shakspeare’s inconspicuous and inconsequential qualities, but kept An examination . . . frankly . . . but kept An examination . . . frankly and confidently . . . but kept in the margin next to these words SLC wrote and then canceled a bracket An examination . . . frankly . . . but kept his main secret loyally loyally nobly and loyally loyally unrevealed. I wonder why a hand acts like that? There doesn’t seem to be any sense in it; nor any fairness. fairness. judacity. fairness. fairness. To return to the experience of nine years ago. To return to the experience of nine years ago. Mr. Niblo’s Report. double rule (Let it follow here.) SLC paraph To return to the experience of eleven nine years ago. To return to the experience of nine years ago. “Destitute [¶] “Destitute [¶] Utterly d “Destitute SLC wrote here in the top margin and then canceled, ‘Find that mock descripn of the countess and put it in as a palmist’s.’; he then wrote ‘STET’ no ¶ “Destitute of the sense of humor.” I could not seem to get over the pain the pain the bitterness the pain the pain of that unkind verdict. And besides, it was as good as repeated, and rubbed in, by the ominous and offensive silence of the six other verdicts: verdicts: verdicts;: semicolon mended to a colon verdicts: they gave me a fair and reasonable share of all the other qualities, but never mentioned humor at all. A friend came in—he was a stern and hard person, and as cold as a frog—and he asked me what I was crying about, and I told him about those lies and slanders, and he said I ought to be ashamed of myself to be such a baby at sixty; and then he went on and pointed out to me a thing which I had not thought of before—to wit to wit to-wit , the vast force, the cumulative force, the convincing force of a unanimous verdict, when arrived at by seven dispassionate and and and unpaid and and unbribed experts, each working independently of the others, in the fear of God, none of them aware of my name, and all of them with reputations to sustain and families to support. families to support. purity to preserve. families to support. families to support. He said that to any intelligent person such a verdict must be final and conclusive; he said that this verdict could not be a lie, but could be an “exposure”—and was. He said he had always believed I was not a humorist, and that I would some day be found out, and now it had happened. He said that by low artifices I had been deceiving and robbing deceiving and robbing misleading and deceiving and robbing deceiving and robbing the people for a quarter of a century; then, after an uncomfortable pause, he asked me if I could hold up my hand and look him in the eye and say this was not so. I tried to do it; but because I couldn’t, on account of rheumatism and strabismus, on account of rheumatism and strabismus, on account of rheumatism and strabismus, on account of rheumatism and strabismus, he said I stood self-convicted. What he chose to call my “confession” awakened his pity, and he urged me to reform and begin a better life, but I tried to appease him with argument. I said it might be that the palmists had been misled by my hand; that if they had known whose hand it was they might have noticed things in it which they had overlooked this time; and I even offered to go in person before another jury of palmists palmists plalmists palmists and make a new and fairer trial, and see how it would come out. But he said it was a foolish idea, and brushed it away. Still, I think there was reason in it. It is so with the phrenologist: he can tell better when he knows you. I am sure of this; for in London, once, I went to Fowler Fowler Fowler and he Fowler as “John B. Smith” and he found no humor in me—said there was an excavation where the humor-bump should have been—yet when I went to him three months later as “Mark Twain” he said frankly and with enthusiasm that there was a pyramid pyramid born horn pyramid pyramid in that place. Now, since knowing me helped a phrenologist, why might it not help a palmist? Reading by Niblo. Reading by Niblo. Put all the “Readings” in small type. Mark. READING BY NIBLO. rule READING BY NIBLO. rule 1. According to the science of Palmistry, this is a Philosophic type of hand. 2. The subject is beyond doubt a great Student, a Thinker and Reformer, broad minded, with a liberal religious sentiment without reference to creed or form. 3. He is progressive and far-seeing, courageous in an emergency, but frequently timid where there is no need of action or quick thought. With him an emergency is an inspiration. 4. His sense of justice is very keen; harshness keen; harshness keen;. Hharshness period mended to a semicolon; ‘H’ marked for lowercase with a slash and ‘l.c.’ keen; harshness to others amounting to personal injury to himself. He is sensitive, impressionable and reticent, hence is not easily understood by his associates. 5. Disposition ordinarily is excellent. He is submissive rather than aggressive, yet radical and determined at heart. His manner is gentle, only becoming brusque or nonchalant nonchalant nonchaleant when stirred to self defence. 6. Independence is the special prerogative of this hand. True the shattered line of Fate marks many hours of darkness and discouragement, but his pride and determination invariably lead him forth into the light, and the harassed spirit rises higher and stronger because of Fate’s very resistance. This gift of buoyancy is not only an endowment of the spirit, but an inheritance of the flesh as well. 7. He is proud, honest and sincere, of a generous nature, with more respect to actions than to the results, ambitious of doing and achieving, and possessing great determination in the line of his efforts. His own success is not sufficient but all for whom he cares must push on with him. 8. Self reliance, internal courage, with an intuitive knack of sounding public sentiment render him capable of becoming a successful leader in the financial and political world, a supporter of any and all innovations that tend toward advancement. 9. An absolute reverence for confidence reposed, is one of the strongest characteristics of this man. 10. Loss of faith would not entail pessimism, however, for he is not one who requires a fixed creed to buoy him up. His superabundant buoyancy of spirit, often compels success where a less confident heart would fail. “The World turns aside to let him pass who knows whither he is going”—and this man knows. His early life is not marked fortunate; menaced by reverses until near his 16th year. After that period excellent things were in store for him. 11. His line of intuition is distinctly marked, showing keen judgment, an excellent judge of character, especially regarding matters of honor or dishonor. 12. The strong line of benevolence is indicative of a charitable nature, giving only for the sake of giving. His hand is expressive of considerable wealth, due in a great measure to his own efforts in life. 13. Fortunately he is not constitutionally frail. Excellently endowed with physical force, he will reach beyond the proverbial limit of life without serious interruption. This strong hold on life he inherits. His death will not take place in the land of his birth. 14. Judging from the condition of the heart line, together with the splendidly developed mount of Venus, his loves are strong and his emotions intense. There will be two great affections satisfied in his life. 15. His mental tastes are extremely refined, fond of gratifying the senses to this extent—appreciates beauty, harmony, color, form, etc. 16. He will meet with his greatest success in middle life, the early years serve merely to “Sow the Seed,” enrich the mind and sound the resources of this naturally vacillating individual. Respectfully, Niblo. I am required to edit Mr. Niblo’s Report. I am required to edit Mr. Niblo’s Report. I am required to edit Mr. Niblo’s Report. I am required to edit Mr. Niblo’s Report. 1. 1. Comments. Niblo. double rule 1. written and canceled here in the top margin: ‘lazy—centre of gravity (attractive) modesty’ 1. Philosophic mind. True. True. True. □ True. corrected miswriting; symbol for an em space True. 2. a. a. a. a. Student of morals, and of man’s nature—in that sense, yes, I am a student, for that study study study study is interesting and interesting and interesting, and interesting and enticing, and requires no painful research, no systematic labor, no midnight-oil effects. But But But But I have never been a student of anything which required of me wearying and distasteful labor. It is for this reason reason reasons reason that the relations between me and the multiplication table are strained. b. [¶] b. It was ever thus. b. b. [¶] b. The rest of the paragraph is true, in detail and in mass. In the line of high philosophics I was always a thinker, but was was was was never regarded by the world by the world myself by the world by the world as the thinker until the course of nature retired Mr. Spencer Mr. Spencer the great and lamented Englishman Herbert Spencer Mr. Spencer Mr. Spencer from the competition. 3. a. a. a. a. “Progressive and far-seeing.” I acknowledge it. b [¶] b □ a b symbol for an em space b . “Courageous in an emergency.” That is too general. There are many kinds of emergencies: we are all good in one or two kinds; some are good in several kinds; but the person who is prompt and plucky in all emergencies is—well, non-existent. He has never lived. If a man were drowning, I would would should would would promptly promptly promptly promptly jump in after him; but if he were falling from a tenth-story window I shouldn’t know enough to stand from under. stand from under. get out of the way. The reason is simple: stand from under. stand from under. You perceive? I am a good and confident swimmer, and have had several emergency-experiences in the water which were of an educating kind, but I have never had a person try to fall on me out of a sky-scraper. Do you you yout you get the idea? The philosophy of it is this: emergency-courage is rather a product of experience than a birthright birthright birth-right marked to close up birth-right . No person, when new and fresh, has emergency-courage enough to set a grip grip sudd grip grip on his purse the first time he the first time he when the first time he the first time he is offered a chance to cheaply buy a patent that is going to revolutionize steam—no, it is the subsequent occasions that find him ready with his gun. I repeat—the palmist has been too general. He should have named the kind of emergencies which find my courage ready and unappalled. I am not saying he could not have done this; and there is one thing which in fairness I must concede: that where brevity is required of the palmist, he is obliged to generalize, he cannot particularize. 4. Again. Generalized, this is true of no one; particularized, it is true of everybody. Harshness to Mr. Henry A. Henry A. Henry A. Henry A. Butters of Long Valley of Long Valley of Long Valley of Long Valley would not grieve my spirit, the spectacle of the King of the Belgians dangling from the gibbet where he belongs would make me grateful. I (along with the whole race) am sensitive (to ridicule and insult); impressionable (where the sex is concerned); reticent (where inconvenient truths are required of me). 5. Again. Generalized thus, this fits the great majority of the human race—including me. It fits the worm, too—to a dot. Read it carefully over, and you will see. 6. I hope that the first sentence is true. Independence of mind is so rare in the world that it may almost be said to be non-existent. I have never known a man who possessed it in any considerable degree. Many thoughtless and shallow people despise the cat—but the cat has it; the cat is the only creature that greatly and grandly possesses it. The last sentence of the paragraph—like the first one—is sharply definite, and is as true as it is definite. I am sure that my buoyancy of spirit is above the average, but is it soberly believable that that fact is set down in the lines of my hand, as by print? My sister, who died died died lately died at a great age, had the same spirit all her life: would Mr. Niblo have discovered it in her hand? My mother, mother, brother mother, mother, who died at a great age (eighty-eight eighty-eight 88 ), possessed it; it never failed her between the cradle and the grave. Was it written down in her hand? My brother, who died at a great age, possessed not a vestige of it. He moved through a cloud of gloom and depression all his days. Could Mr. Niblo have read that pathetic secret in his hand? I wish I had prints of the family’s hands; I would submit them to judgment with a warm curiosity. 7. We are all proud, in one way or another; we are all honest in some ways and dishonest in others; we are all sincere at times and insincere at other times; we are all ambitious, along one or two narrow lines, but indifferent along all the others. We must throw No. 7 into the generalization-basket. 8. My fondness for experiments and innovations is really above the average, I believe. My mother was like that; my sister, who was an interested and zealous invalid during sixty-five years, tried all the new diseases as fast as they came out, and always enjoyed the newest one more than any that went before; my brother had accumulated forty-two brands of Christianity before he was called away. Yes, I think the closing clause of No. 8 is correct. But the rest of the paragraph contains errors, particularly the part about political and political and political and political and financial leadership. leadership. leadership. There is too much bulk to me, too much weight; leadership. No kind of leadership could ever be in my line. It would curtail my freedom; also it would make me me me me corrected miswriting me work when I did not want to work. work. work. Money and glory could not compensate me for these work. My nature would fret and complain and rebel, and I should fail. 10. Last sentence. No one ever said a truer thing. Up to the age of seven seven 7 I was at the point of death nearly all the time, yet could never make it. It made the family tired. Particularly my father, who was of a fine and sensitive nature, and it was difficult for him to bear up under disappointments. In the next eight eight 8 years—I am speaking the truth, I give you my word of honor—I was within one gasp of drowning nine different times, and in addition in addition in addition in addition was thrice brought to the verge of death by doctors and disease; yet it was all of no use, nothing could avail, it was just one reverse after another, and here I am to this day. With every hope long ago blighted. Are these the reverses that stand written in my hand? I know of no others, of that early time. others, of that early time. others., of that early time. others, of that early time. 13. First sentence. Seems so, from the revelations which I have just made. But how does he find find kn find find it out from the flat print of my hand? It is very curious. curious. curious. First part of second sentence curious. I have seldom been sick since I was fifteen fifteen 15 ; I am sixty-nine now. I am sixty-nine now. a few weeks from now I shall be 69. I am 69 now. I am 69 now. Third sentence: the inheritance is from my mother’s side. She was a Lampton. No Lampton ever died prematurely, except by courtesy of the sheriff. sheriff. sheriff. [¶] Summary. Mr. Niblo scores 5 times; namely, in paragraphs 1, 2, and 6; close of 8; 13. sheriff. Reading by Mr. Fletcher. Reading by Mr. Fletcher. Reading by Mr. Fletcher. double rule Reading by Mr. Fletcher. rule 1. This is a hand of strong and marked personality; one in which many phases of decided ability are depicted, in fact it would be possible to read it from at least three points of view, and find a complete history in each. 2. The left hand shows many possibilities of a widely varying character, and not all in harmony with each other by any means. The right hand, however, shows that these have been used by mental determination to build up a personality that is full of force and ability, and one that relies absolutely upon itself. In no sense a dependent hand. In no sense a negative hand. Impressionable without question, but these impressions are recognized then selected, and then directed. They rarely, if ever, are the controlling factor. The Ego rules, and directs the abilities, instead of being swayed by the emotions, strong as these are on occasions. It is distinguished by great originality of thought; demonstrates marked powers of concentration, and never gives up what is undertaken no matter how great the opposition no matter how great the opposition no matter how great the opposition no matter how great the opposition . There is, however, considerable irritability evidenced over delay, or the power of others to grasp situations readily, since this mind takes in at a glance the beginning and the end. Details are dealt with as a whole, rather than being patiently considered. There is no doubt about the conclusions being usually correct. The remarkable record for the past 15 years undoubtedly demonstrates that the palms show many plans that are from time to time suggested, but the fingers could never find the time or opportunities to execute one half of them. No one ever opened door for this hand and said “Come in, this is the way, and here is a garden already for you.” 2. It has found its own door, made its own way, and planted every tree and shrub there is in the garden, and there are a great many. To be sure, at times the sun has shone benignly and the growth has been accordingly rapid, and this will continue to the end. 3. This is a nervous, energetic, determined hand, with, at times, a charm of personality, or magnetism magnetism magnaetism revised in pencil magnetism about it that could compass almost almost almost almost almost any result. This will continue to the end. It might suffer itself to a great degree, in a quiet way; it would never intentionally cause suffering to others. It is too considerate and humanitarian for that. It will never be satisfied with itself, no matter how great the meed of praise from others may be. The unattained will ever loom up before it, even while others are speaking words of highest commendation. 4. Its interests will always be of a large and comprehensive character. The tendency is ever to attempt too much for one thought to lead up to another, whereby still greater possibilities will be revealed. It’s It’s Its a hand while kindly and generous to a fault with others is never overkind or considerate of itself. The life line is long and well defined, showing inherited longevity from one side of the family. Illnesses are few, few, few, but should they occur pronounced, few, but with extraordinary power of reaction reaction inreaction revised in pencil reaction . The nervous energy is at times tremendous, and rises on occasions to heights that carry carry carriesy carry all before it. 5. The head line shows great pride and ambition, and a marked power of concentration of the energies to a given point. There is little pleasure in the victories of yesterday. It’s It’s Its always the work of the tomorrow that engages this mind. The intellectual qualities are of a high order, the result of years of careful and severe training, yet it it is it is quite possible for this mind to move in a groove, and not be always characterized by the spirit of strict justice. 6. Again this same line gives strong artistic and refined tendencies, and a tendency also to temporary depression which, however, deters the hand not a jot from the work undertaken. 7. Opposition, and some times, marked personal antagonism are also much evidenced, but instead of changing the purpose they have for the most part strengthened and intensified it. This hand brooks little interference from anyone, yet respects authority in the true sense of the word. 8. The heart line shows strong affections and warm sympathies for the few and great fidelity to all obligations. It is ever willing to do more than requested. It holds friendship as one of the most sacred things in the world, although betrayed more than once by friends. The domestic side is not discussed in this reading. This hand ought to be at touch with many people either in public life, or in very close connection with it. It certainly has the power of swaying opinions. The hand is eminently successful, and yet the full measure of its just just first just revised in pencil just recognition is before rather than behind it. Its work lives long after its activities. 9. There is the the the the strong will that goes with this type of hand which in many instances borders upon obstinacy, and simply will not be moved from a purpose. This is especially true when any principle is at stake. It is absolutely protected from danger although not infrequently at touch with it. 10. A hand that has made, and is destined to continue to make a strong impression upon the public mind and yet remain indifferent to it. Paragraph 2. “Relies absolutely upon itself; in no sense a dependent hand, in no sense a negative hand.” Certainly that is definite enough. And notches the edge of the bull’s-eye, too, let us hope; I am not here to discourage compliments. “Distinguished by great originality of thought.” I could not deny the accuracy of that and be honest. “Never gives gives givess gives up what is undertaken, no matter how great the opposition.” That is definite; there is no uncertain ring about it. But it is not true. Indeed, it is very far from being true. I call to mind mind my mind mind not an episode in my life indicating in me—on on for on on even a a that a a single occasion—the presence of an unconquerable persistency. “The remarkable record of the past fifteen fifteen 15 years”—very good, that far; stupendously good; stupendously good; stupendously good; to me those years were quite over-remarkable: in worry, in apprehension, in grief, in misfortune piled upon misfortune, disaster upon disaster, the fifteen the fifteen they 15 the 15 outdid all the fifty-four fifty-four 54 that preceded them put together. If the palmist had only stopped at that point! He would have scored handsomely—albeit indefinitely; but when he goes on to explain why the fifteen fifteen 15 were remarkable, it is a most sad drop from the impressive to the commonplace, and the result of that indiscreet drop is that the remarkableness of the fifteen fifteen 15 entirely disappears. “Many plans suggested—no time or opportunity to execute the half of them;” dear me, it happens to everybody, there is nothing remarkable about it. 4. “Long life-line; inherited longevity from one side of the family; illnesses are few.” All definite and correct. He and Mr. Niblo are in agreement upon these points. 8. First sentence. I hope it is true; also, I believe it is. 9. “Will not be moved from a purpose when a principle is at stake.” Perhaps it comes near to being true; still, I think it is a little too sweeping, and a trifle too strong. 10. “Indifferent?” No, that would be against nature. The man who has made either a good impression or a bad one upon the public mind may be outwardly tranquil about it, but never inwardly indifferent. Reading by Mr. Perin. Reading by Mr. Perin. Reading by Mr. Perrin PERIN triple rule insertion by SLC; second ‘r’ in ‘Perrin’ canceled in pencil, presumably by SLC, who wrote ‘PERIN’ in ink above the corrected name Reading by Mr. Perin. rule 1. This is the hand of a good man. 2. In these very few words I could characterize the tendencies and ambitions of this hand. 3. By careful examination of the lines and marks I find this person to be between the age of fifty-five and sixty. 4. The Line of Health shows a fair development of physical strength and his body should never be unduly taxed. 5. The Line of the Head in the left hand shows a powerful brain, he is a natural genius and an intellectual giant. 6. This man should have become a Judge. 7. He is made of the finest clay, is high minded, has a will of steel hardly ever asking or taking advice. 8. His judgment can be fully relied upon. 9. The Line of the Heart as well as the Circle of Mercury in the right hand shows him to be extremely tender hearted, at the same time strong in his convictions. 10. The second phalange of the third finger combined with the Mount of Saturn shows considerable energy, he is self-possessed and his presence of mind is remarkable. 11. The Line of Respiration on the base of the Mount of Jupiter shows that his lungs demand a liberal supply of oxygen. 12. The Line of Blood Circulation shows him to have regular heart beats, and a strong and steady pulsation of blood. 13. The Mount of Luna shows him to be exquisitely moulded, honorable and faithful. 14. The Circle of Venus shows his love of mankind. 15. The Line of Intuition in the left hand between the third and little finger shows him to be a great judge of human nature. 16. There is a very distinctive mark near the the the the the Mount of Venus Venus Venus Venues which proves him to be very accurate, he remembers dates perfectly, can judge fairly well of time, while the Mount of Venus proves his love for home. home. home. 17. In judging from the formation of this mount I should say that this man is married and happy. home. 17. His Line of Constructiveness shows him to be fond fond firm fond fond of contriving new ways of doing things. 18. He is prolific in ideas, he is very skilled to construct sentences in speech or writing. 19. His Literary Line shows profound ability. 20. The shape of the third finger shows him to be a forceful and magnetic speaker. 21. The Line of Sublimity proves his fondness of the sublime in nature, yet he is not moved to enthusiasm by grandeur. 22. The Line of Muscular temperament shows his moral faculties well balanced, and he shall never need help to keep him in the path of rectitude. 23. The first phalange of the little finger and the Mount of Mercury proves this man to be a philosopher. 24. The thumb of the left hand proves love for children and pets, and the Line of Approbativeness shows ambition and that he desires to write his name on the scroll of fame, but that he is not blinded by the glare of popularity. 25. He is decided and determined, persevering and very firm of purpose. 26. He is industrious and progressive, and any obstacle only stimulates him to greater action. 27. The Line of Secretiveness shows him to be very reserved, and the Line of Conscientiousness which is exceedingly well marked in the centre of the left hand shows shows shows him shows that he would never swerve from his conception of right, and that he has the habit to sit in judgment upon his own acts and deeds of others, showing little mercy to the wrong doer. 28. He is a law unto himself. 29. The Line of Benevolence proves this man to be generous to a fault, and that he has a heart too big for his purse. 30. Nothing gives him greater pleasure than bestowing. 31. He is very sympathetic. 32. The Line of Mirthfulness shows him to be fond of joking, and that he enjoys jokes, and laughs at good ones. 33. The Line of Causality Causality Casusuality Causality shows reasoning, thinking, and that he possesses a very comprehensive mind. 34. The Line of Comparison shows that he can trace the relation between the known and unknown with unerring exactness. 35. In conclusion I desire to speak of his Line of Faith which proves that he will become at least ninety-five years old. 36. The lower part of the Line of Faith with the triangle below the Mount of Mercury shows that his past life has been very honorable, that he is a self made man, and that he has been a public servant serving his fellow men with the most beautiful tendencies and convictions. 37. But, the very best part of his life is yet to come. 38. He will be called upon and it will be expected of him to perform such deeds that will bring him honor, and his countrymen satisfaction and gratification. 39. I have absolutely no idea to whom this hand belongs, if the imprint was properly taken I am absolutely convinced that it is the hand of an ideal man. (Signed) DR. CARL L. PERIN, PH.D. 1. 1. Comments. [¶] 1. and 2. 1. “Good man,” large man, little man. Phrases of this kind have no meaning. They furnish no definite definite definite definite measure of the thing mentioned. There was never an average man an average man any one an average man an average man whom these phrases would not fit. Every average average average average man is good—by comparison with one or another of his neighbors; and large or little, by comparison with undergrowns and overgrowns overgrowns undovergrowns overgrowns . 2. This abolishes No. 1. It exposes the fact that I am not good, but am merely equipped with certain “tendencies and ambitions” “tendencies and ambitions” “tendencies and ambitions” “tendencies and ambitions” in that direction—size of the tendencies and ambitions not specified. 3. That is the age of my spirit, not of my body. body. body. [¶] 4. The first clause body. 4. A little vague. Does it mean that when a person possesses average physical strength his body should never be unduly taxed? If that is it, then it ought to have specified the circumstances under which it should be unduly and recklessly taxed. In case the emergency should arise. 5. Definite—also accurate. 6. Definite. But on the whole doubtful, I think. 7. That about the clay is all right. 8. Fatally indefinite. Judgment of what—not stated. Apples? literature? literature? literature? literature? weather? whisky? theology? hotels? emperors? oysters? horses? As regards emperors and weather my judgment is better than any other person’s, but as regards all other things I know it to be bad. 9. The first clause of the sentence is true, but what has the rest of the sentence to do with it? I am tender-hearted notwithstanding I have strong convictions—convictions of what? and why couldn’t I be tender-hearted without having any convictions at all, or any teeth, or real estate? and . . . be . . . estate? and . . . b◊◊◊e be . . . estate? inserted on the verso with instructions to turn over and . . . be . . . estate? “Convictions” is manifestly the wrong word. It may easily be that I am tender-hearted notwithstanding I am bald-headed, for of course that could mean something, but I don’t think “convictions” means anything, in that place. 10. I have already remarked remarked explained remarked remarked upon the emptiness of phrases like “presence of mind” when used in a general and unparticularized way. 11. Exactly and remarkably true—of everybody’s lungs. 12. Does it mean that I have a strong pulse? In that case it is an error. I have a sort of a kind of a pulse, it is true, but not every doctor can find it and swear to it. The Marienbad specialist felt around over my breast and back and back and back and back and abdomen and said with quite unnecessary frankness that he could not prove that I hadn’t a heart, but that if I had one it would be an advantage to trade it for a potato potato potatoe potato . 13. “Exquisitely moulded.” It is hereditary in the family. Exquisitely moulded and attractive, people often say. Some have thought me the most attractive thing in the universe except that mysterious and mysterious and mysterious and mysterious and wonderful force which draws all matter toward its throne in the sun, the Attraction of Gravitation; others go even further, and think I am that sublime sublime ma sublime and majestic sublime force itself. These commonly speak of me as the Centre of Gravity. Over great stretches of the earth’s surface I am known by no name but that—the Centre of Gravity. It pleases me and makes me happy, but I often feel that it may not be true. God knows. It is not for me to say. 15. If this is not a heedless use of words—if human nature is really meant and not character—this is the best guess yet. The nature of man is the one sole thing that I do know, down to the bottom. I know the secretest secrets of man’s heart, I know all its impulses, its deep workings, its shallow workings, its honesties, its sincerities, its conscious conscious conscious conscious shams, its unconscious shams, its innocent self-delusions, its boundless and bottomless vanities. That is to say, I know my own heart perfectly. I have studied it through years and years of eager and consuming interest, interest, study, interest, interest and I know it to be the average heart. In other words, I know the machine that is shut up inside of a man, and what it can do; but I can’t tell by the look of the man’s outside what it will do. Some can tell, by a look at the outside, which parts of the hidden machine—the good ones or the evil ones—get the most work to do; these are the observers who are able to read character, these are the the the the people who are are not in are able to judge men. I am not of those. I am a pretty poor judge of men by their outsides; I can seldom tell a Butters from an honest man by looking at him. A Countess Massiglia Countess Massiglia countess Massiglia written here in the margin: ‘Strike out the countess if I insert her “Reading.” ’ countess Massiglia cannot deceive me, it is true, it is true, it is true, it is true but that is nothing; that species cannot even even even even deceive a detective. detective. cat. detective. detective. 16. “Remembers dates perfectly.” Now that is distinctly curious. I do remember dates pretty well—rather unusually well, perhaps—but there is nothing else that I can keep in my memory. Am I to believe that my hand knows that odd fact and is able to communicate it to a palmist? 18. I will think this over over over, over and see if it is true, before committing myself. 19 and 20. and 20. and 20. and 20. It would be useless for me to deny these; these; this; these; SLC tried to mend ‘this’ to ‘these’ before canceling and rewriting it these; few would believe me. 21. If the first half of the remark is true, it goes without saying that the other half isn’t. 23. Philosopher again. This is cumulative evidence, and has high value. It is easy to see that there is something in palmistry. I wrote a philosophy six years ago, after studying my subject fifteen years. All this time I have kept that manuscript hidden away in a secret place, lest its its is its its character become known and I get exterminated. And now my hand has betrayed my secret. It is a strange kind of treachery, and not pleasant. 25 and 26. 25 and 26. [¶] 25 and 26. As before observed, every man has these qualities [¶] 25, 2 and 26., and 27. 25 and 26. I have examined this vague generalization in my comments upon Mr. Niblo’s “reading.” 27. I am not conspicuously reserved; and not secretive at all, except when I have been doing things which are better left unpublished. We are all like that. 28. We will allow that slander to pass. 29 and 30. and 30. and 30. and 30. Pretty wide of the mark. Even if it were true, how would my right hand know what my left hand doeth? doeth? doeth? This is an doeth? It is my right hand that is under examination, and is quite too “fresh.” It knows nothing about the matter. 32. “Fond of joking. Laughs at good ones.” Is that all? It describes the entire human race. So, that elephant elephant ele- phant has gone to halifax again. phant elephant has shrunken to next-to-nothing-and-none-to-carry again. The preceding experts overlooked him altogether. I think it is not kind. 33. This takes away some of the pain, but not all of it. 34. But this removes the last pang. If I can do that, I am satisfied. To be called a philosopher has pleased me; to be recognized as a theologian fills my cup. 35. They all agree upon long life for me. I do not much mind the ninety-five ninety-five 95 , but I do do dont do not like the “at least.” Ninety-five is plenty plenty a plenty plenty ; if I may, I will stand pat at that. NOTE. To none of the experts has my hand revealed the fact that I have a passion for music—a passion restricted to a single kind of music: the sombre, the solemn, the melancholy. Indeed, music is not even mentioned. It seems very curious, very strange, that my hand should be so reserved about my couple of dearly-prized and stately possessions, Music and Humor. NOTE. To . . . for music—a passion . . . couple . . . Humor. centered title with flourishes above and below: The Countess [¶] NOTE. To . . . for music—a passion . . . dearly- couple . . . Humor. ‘NOTE’ in simulated capitals, not underscored Note. To . . . for music—a passion . . . couple . . . Humor. Has there been a mistake? Is it not possible that the experts got my hand-prints mixed with other people’s hand-prints, and have examined some of those for mine and have not examined mine at all? I think it possible; indeed I know it is, for it is a thing which has happened in at least one case, to my knowledge. It occurred in Italy, and is celebrated. celebrated. a celebrated. case. celebrated. Americans who were sojourning in Italy in those days, will remember the stir it made, the joy, the laughter, the rain of delighted tears! The expert mixed his hand-prints, and by accident by accident by accident by accident attached his reading of Queen Marguerite’s to the Countess Raybaudi- Raybaudi- Ribaudi- Ribaudi- Massiglia’s prints—with electrifying results! It painted the Queen’s character as it was, and is: lofty, just, merciful, honest, honorable, gracious, generous, gentle, stainless—and then innocently labeled it with the notorious American’s name!