26 March 1907 Tuesday, March 26, 1907 Mr. Clemens has been taking another vacation, and a flying trip to Bermuda—His experiences with his eighty thousand dollars eighty thousand dollars $80,000 in 10 per cent per cent % stock—Miss Clemens’s singing on the concert stage a success; she has learned how to please her audiences—Thomas Bailey Aldrich dead; none of the gay company of old left but Mr. Howells and Mr. Clemens—Mr. Clemens has completed the work which remained for him to do—his Autobiography—or enough of it to accomplish his object in writing it: to distribute it through his books and thus secure a new copyright life for them. I have been taking another vacation—a vacation for which there was no excuse that I can think of except that I wanted to get away from work for a while to appease a restlessness which invades my system, now and then, and is perhaps induced by the fact that for thirty-five years I have spent all my winters in idleness, and have not learned to feel natural and at home in winter-work. I seem to have been silent about a month. Many things have happened in the meantime, and as I recall them I perceive that each incident was important in its hour, and alive with interest; then quickly lost color and life, and is now of no consequence. And this is what our life consists of—a procession of episodes and experiences which seem large when they happen, but which diminish to trivialities as soon as we get a perspective upon them. Upon these terms a diary ought to be a curious record, for in it all the events ought to be large, and all of the same size—with the result that by and by the recorded events should still be nearly all of one size, and that size lamentably shrunken in bulk. This is a sordid and commercialized age, and few can live in such an atmosphere and remain unaffected by it; but I find that even the stock market is like the other interests—it cannot hold my attention long at a time. I have eighty thousand dollars in a 10 per cent 10 per cent ten per cent. stock, and I was not thinking of selling it, although I bought it to sell. While I was not noticing, it crept up, point by point, each point representing a profit of fifteen hundred dollars, and in the course of two or three weeks it climbed twenty-six twenty-six twenty-seven points, each point, as I have said, standing for a profit of fifteen hundred dollars. If I had been awake I would have sold out and captured that thirty-nine thousand dollars to build the house with—for John Howells has been architecting a house for us, to be built upon the farm near Redding, Connecticut, which we bought a year and a half ago—but I was asleep, and did not wake up again until yesterday: meantime that stock had been sliding down, and in its descent it had sponged out the entire twenty-six points by by by by yesterday afternoon. Then I bought some more of it, and made an order for a further purchase this morning if it should fall two or three points lower. I was hoping it would, but it didn’t. It has started up again again again this morning, and I have recorded one more mistake. I hoped it would go ’way down, ’way down, ’way down, further, but since it has concluded to go up, I will try to get a sort of satisfaction out of watching its flight. Each ascending point now represents a profit of seventeen hundred and fifty dollars and it has accomplished two points since yesterday afternoon. The next incident of importance was another trip trip flight trip to Bermuda a week or two ago. We went and came in the same ship, as before. The passages to and fro, and the twenty-four hours’ sojourn in those delightful islands, were matters of high importance and enchanting interest for the time being, but already they have shriveled to nothing, and taken their place among the rest of the trivialities of life. Clara has been barnstorming on the concert stage in New England the past few weeks, and at last she has learned her trade and is qualified to succeed, and will succeed—a great event for her, and a great event for me. By learning her trade, I mean that by normal normal natural normal processes her theories, which naturally seemed made of boiler-iron or some other indestructible substance, have been blown to the four winds winds winds, by experience, that best of all teachers. According to her theories, her first duty was to be faithful to the highest requirements of her art and not move upon any plane but the highest; this meant classical music for all audiences, whether they were qualified to appreciate it and enjoy it or not. Experience has taught her that she and her audiences are in a tacit co-partnership, and that she must consider their share of the business and not arrange her performances to please herself alone. She has found, indeed, that her first duty is really to forget herself and give all her attention to pleasing her house. She has found that in striving to please the house she has accomplished several several two several important things: her heart goes out to the house; by natural law the hearts of the house meet it half way; all hands are pleased; all dread and all anxiety have disappeared from her spirit, and life upon the platform has become to her a delight, and as pretty as a fairy-tale. She takes an undaughterful pleasure in noting that now the newspapers are beginning to concede with heartiness that she does not need the help of my name, but can make her way quite satisfactorily upon her own merits. This is insubordination, and must be crushed. Thomas Bailey Aldrich has passed from this life, seventy years old. I was not back from Bermuda in time to attend the funeral, and the physicians would not allow Howells to go, he being but lately recovered from a wasting attack of the grippe. He was here yesterday, and naturally we called the roll. So many are gone! Of the gay company of us that used to foregather in Boston, thirty-five years ago and more, not one is left but himself himself Howells himself and me; and of the New York contingent of that day we could call to mind no conspicuous member still in the flesh except Stedman. We had a right to complain of the order of the procession—disorder is its right name—for almost every one of those old-time friends got his release before he was fairly entitled to it. Howells and I have been postponed, and postponed, and postponed, until the injustice of it is becoming offensive. It is true that Aldrich was entitled to go before Howells, because he achieved his threescore threescore three score and ten last November, whereas Howells only only only attained to that age on the 1st of the present month; but I am seventy-one and four months over—thus I ranked Aldrich by sixteen months—and was entitled to the precedence in the great procession. I do not need to stay here any longer, for I have completed the only work that was remaining for me to do in this life and that I could not possibly afford to leave uncompleted—my Autobiography. Although that is not finished, and will not be finished until I die, the object which I had in view in compiling it is accomplished: that object was to distribute it through my existing books and give each of them a new copyright life of twenty-eight years, and thus defeat the copyright statute’s cold intention to rob and starve my daughters. rob and starve my daughters. rob them and starve them. my daughters. I have dictated four or five hundred thousand words of autobiography already, and if I should die to-morrow this mass of literature would be quite sufficient for the object which I had in view in manufacturing it. That very remarkable woman and exceedingly valuable citizen, Mrs. Kinnicutt, dined with us two or three nights ago, and that other very remarkable woman, Mrs. Draper, would have come also but an engagement prevented it. Mrs. Kinnicutt said—but I will refer to this later. Mrs. Kinnicutt . . . later. Mrs. Kinnicut . . . later.