24 November 1908 Dictated at Stormfield, November 24 November 24 Nov. 24th , 1908 Lord Northcliffe came up with Colonel Harvey to talk over my new copyright scheme, and spent the night. Considering his years, which are but forty-three, he is easily the most remarkable man of the day, I think. He has a smooth young face and frank and strong youthful enthusiasms, enthusiasms veiled under his native English reserve, but quite perceptible, nevertheless. When I first met him, eight or nine years ago, he was as fresh-faced as a boy, and indeed looked like a boy; yet he had already achieved his fortune, made his mark, and was a recognized recognized recognised power in the English world. He began life under unpromising circumstances. He came up to London from the country, unacquainted with the world, destitute of friends competent to help him, a stranger, a waif, and without money. He presently got a humble place in a publication office, and as soon as his wage was increased to twenty dollars a month, he got married. He was about twenty-one or twenty-two years old then. Twelve years later, when I first knew him, he was proprietor of ten or twenty prosperous periodicals and daily newspapers, was burdened with more money than he knew how to spend, and had acquired a title—Sir Alfred Harmsworth. To-day, aged forty-three, he is Lord Northcliffe, is chief proprietor of that journal which for a hundred years has ranked with the sceptred sovereigns of the world as a political power, and he owns and conducts fifty-two other journals and magazines besides the one just mentioned, the London Times Times Times . He lives in various palaces which he owns, he is steeped in luxury and magnificence, he has money without limit, yet he is in no way spoiled but is simple and modest in his ways, and quite as unassuming as he was when he married the moneyless girl of his choice on an income of twenty dollars twenty dollars $20 a month. He liked my new copyright scheme, of course. I know it to be the only one not idiotic that has ever been devised. He said that if I would go to England with it he would work for it with zeal in Parliament and would support it with equal zeal with with with with his entire battery of fifty-two guns including the London Times Times times . I am aware that to pass a measure in Parliament would be the same as passing it in Congress, because Congress always imitates Parliament in matters of copyright and never ventures to initiate anything in that line itself, but I do not want to go to England with this enterprise yet for I believe I can work it through Congress this winter, and so at the judicious time I shall go to Washington and make the attempt. If I fail I shall go to England early next summer, or next spring, and take up the matter there with Northcliffe. The following contains an embodiment of my scheme. Copyright. Copyright. single rule Copyright. double rule COPYRIGHT. single rule A Memorial respectfully tendered to the Members of the Senate and the House of Representatives. Representatives. Representatives. | double rule Representatives. Nineteen Nineteen EightNineteen Nineteen or twenty years ago, James Russell Lowell, George Haven Putnam, and the undersigned, and the undersigned, and the undersigned, and the undersigned, appeared before the Senate Commitee on Patents in the interest of Copyright. Up to that time, as explained by Senator Platt of Connecticut, the policy policy desire and policy policy of The policy policy desired purpose policy POLICY of Congress. Congress had been to limit the life of a copyright by a term of years, with one definite end in view, and only one— one— one— one— hyphen retraced to make a dash one— to wit, that after an author had been permitted to enjoy, for for the property for for a reasonable length of time, the income from literary income from literary income from literary income from literary property created by his hand and brain, the property the property it the property the property should then be transferred transferred “given transferred transferred “to the public” public” public.” The distinct desire, purpose and intention public” (in truthfuler language public” as a free gift. That is still the policy of of of Congress being that thereafter of of Congress to-day. to-day. to-day., concerning Copyright. to-day. The purpose in view was clear: clear: clear—: clear: to so reduce the price of the book as to bring it within the reach The purpose in view. of all purses purses purpses purses , and spread it among the millions who had not been able to buy it while it was still under protection protection protection the protection of copyright. This purpose has always been defeated. been defeated. failed. been defeated. been defeated. That is is its is to say, say, say, it has always failed say, that while the death of a copyright has sometimes reduced The purpose defeated.the price of a book by a half, for a while, and in some cases by even more, it has never reduced it vastly, nor accomplished accomplished made accomplished accomplished any reduction that was was was was permanent and secure. The reason is simple: Congress has never made a reduction compulsory. Congress was convinced that the removal The reason.of the author’s royalty royalty royalty would royalty and the book’s consequent (or at least probable) consequent (or at least probable) consequent (or at least probable) consequent (or at least probable) dispersal among several competing competing competing competing publishers would make the book cheap by force of the the the the competition. It was an error. It has not turned out so. The reason is, is, is, simple: is, a a a a publisher cannot find profit in an exceedingly cheap edition if he must divide the market with competitors. The natural remedy would seem to be, an amended law requiring the issue of cheap Proposed remedy. editions. I think the remedy could be accomplished be accomplished be applied be accomplished be accomplished in the following way, without injury to author or publisher, Copyright extension.and with extreme advantage to the public extreme advantage to the public extreme advantage to the public extreme advantage to the public ‘extreme advantage to the public’ underscored extreme advantage to the public : by an amendment to the existing law providing as follows— follows— follows— follows— hyphen retraced to make a dash follows— to wit: that at any time between the beginning of a book’s forty-first year and the ending of its forty-second between the beginning of a book’s forty-first year and the ending of its forty-second within a book’s 42d year, the between the beginning of a book’s 41st year and the ending of its 42d between the beginning of a book’s forty-first year and the ending of its forty-second the the the the owner of the the its the the copyright may extend its extend its by applying to the librarian of Congress extend its extend its extend its life thirty thirty 30 thirty years by issuing and placing by issuing and placing upon this condition to wit: that he ha shall at once issue and publicly place by issuing and placing by issuing and placing on sale an edition of the book at one-tenth the price of the cheapest edition, thitherto edition, thitherto edition thitherto edition, thitherto edition thitherto issued at any time during during in during during the ten immediately preceding years; this years; this years; this years: this years: This extension to lapse and become null and void and void and void and void if at any time during the thirty thirty 30 thirty years he shall fail during the space of the space of the space of the space of three consecutive months to furnish the 10 10 ten per cent book upon demand of any person or persons desiring to buy it. upon demand of any person or persons desiring to buy it. when required. upon demand of any person or persons desiring to buy it. ¶ upon demand of any person or persons desiring to buy it. The result would be, be, be, be that no American classic enjoying the thirty-year thirty-year 30-year thirty-year extension The result. would ever be out of the reach of any American purse, let its uncompulsory uncompulsory uncompulsory iuncompulsory uncompulsory price price edition price price be what it might. He would get a two-dollar book for twenty twenty 20 cents, and he could get none but copyright-expired classics at any such rate. At the end of the thirty-year thirty-year 30-year thirty-year extension the copyright would again die, and the price The final result. would again advance. This by a natural law, the excessively cheap edition edition edition being edition no longer longer longer compulsory and longer carrying with it an an no an an advantage to any publisher. A clause of the suggested amendment could read about as follows, and would obviate the Reconstruction of the present law not necessary. necessity of taking the present law to pieces and building it over again: All books, and all all other all all articles other than books, other than books, other than books, not in enjoying forty-two forty-two 42 forty-two years’ years’ years copyright-life copyright-life copyright,-life copyright-life copyright-life under the present law shall be admitted to the privilege of the thirty-year thirty-year 30-year thirty-year extension upon complying with the condition requiring the producing producing production producing producing and placing upon permanent sale of one grade or form of said said the said said book or article at a price 90 per cent below the cheapest rate at which said book or article had been placed upon the market at any time market at any time market, at any time market at any time during the immediately preceding ten years. Remarks. Remarks. single rule Remarks. double rule REMARKS. single rule If the suggested suggested proposed suggested suggested amendment shall meet meet pass meet meet with the favor of the present the present the present the present Congress and become law—and I hope it will—I shall have personal experience of its effects very soon. Next year, in fact: fact: fact.; fact;: semicolon mended to a colon fact: in in the person of my first book, “The Innocents Abroad.” in the . . . “The Innocents Abroad.” in the . . . “The Innocents Abroad.” in the . . . “The Innocents Abroad”. in the . . . “The Innocents Abroad” For its forty-two-year forty-two-year 42-year forty-two-year forty-two year copyright-life copyright-life copyright-life copyright life will then cease and its thirty-year thirty-year 30-year thirty-year extension begin— begin— begin— begin— hyphen retraced to make a dash begin— and with the latter the permanent low-rate edition. At present the highest price of the book is eight dollars, eight dollars, ,space left for words eight dollars, eight dollars, and its lowest price three dollars per copy. three dollars per copy. $32 per copy. □ symbol for an em space $23 per copy. $3 per copy. Thus the permanent permanent permant permanent low-rate price will be thirty cents thirty cents 30 20 cents 20 30 cents 30 cents per copy. A sweeping sweeping vast sweeping sweeping reduction like this is what Congress, from the beginning, has desired Congress, from the beginning, has desired Congress, from the beginning, has desired from the beginning Congress from the beginning has desired to achieve, but has not been able to accomplish because no inducement was offered to publishers to run the risk. Respectfully submitted. submitted. submitted. submitted, S. L. Clemens S. L. Clemens SLC [paraph] ‖ N. B. double rule [¶] Colonel, provide a highest-priced a copy of “Innocents” for each Senator and Representative,;— also a copy of semicolon mended to a comma the present lowest-priced; [¶] Also, a neat 30-cent sample, cleanly-printed, compact and complete—in pretty paper covers. I will autograph these cheap any or all of these books if they ask me. And I will hint the same to them, if they don’t ask me. double rule 391 Representatives and about 100 Senators. 500 copies. double rule 1000 altogether, cheap and cheapest together. ‖ [¶] The wage-earning milloions have not bought these expired-copyright books and could not afford them. But they would have bought them if they could have had an edition at one-tenth the price the well-to-do were obliged to pay for the finer editions. SL. Clemens [paraph] double line to indicate the place to stop stop here N.B. single rule [¶] Colonel, provide a copy of “Innocents” for each Senator and Representative—the present lowest-priced. [¶] Also a neat 30-cent sample, cleanly printed, compact and complete—in pretty paper covers. I will autograph any or all of these books if they ask me. And I will hint the same to them if they don’t ask me. double rule [¶] 391 Representatives and about 100 Senators. 500 copies. [¶] 1000 altogether, cheap and cheapest together. ‖ [¶] The wage-earning millions have not bought these expired-copyright books and could not afford them. But they would have bought them if they could have had an edition at one-tenth the price the well-to-do were obliged to pay for the finer editions. S. L. Clemens.