Note to Chapter . . . Note to Chapter . . . Chapter . . . Chapter . . . | double rule As concerns the certainty that a writer who ventures to use the professional technicalities and freemasonries freemasonries free-|masonries of a trade which he has not not not served in his own person person person and also for years and years, if it will never fail to make make will make mistakes which will “give him away” to the master of that trade—oh, well, literature is crowded with with with instances. Chapter X of Alice Kegan Rice’s new book (“Mr. Orr”) opens with a scene on a Mississippi steamboat which will sound ever so sane and natural and correct to the average passenger familiar with those boats, but it will sorely befog the trained steamboatman. There’s a generous supply of steamboat details, and they ought to enable him to locate the scene of the episode, but they won’t. He may examine them till he is tired, he will remain a defeated man: he will not be able to determine which end of the boat the thing happened on. Thirty-seven or thirty-eight years ago, when John Hay and I were young and he was on the Tribune staff, he gathered his Pike County Ballads together for publication in book form, and he asked me for advice concerning the ballad of the “Prairie Belle.” Was there anything steamboatfully incorrect in it? “Yes, but nothing worth the trouble of correcting, since the error is so small and so technical that the great public will never detect it. You make the engineer of the burning boat the hero. It is he who bravely resolves to hold the steamer’s ‘nozzle ‘nozzle “‘nozzle to the bank till the last galoot’s ashore.’ ashore.’ ashore.’” ◇ He couldn’t do it by himself; he couldn’t see where the nozzle was, from his place on the main deck amidships; he would have to have intelligent orders from the pilot-house pilot-house pilot house , by bells or speaking tube. In that case there would be two heroes, and the pilot would be the chief one, since his post would be some thirty or forty times as perilous as the engineer’s.” So Hay made no change, and the poem remains now as he originally wrote it. In the ballad of the “Heathen Chinee,” there’s a euchre-game euchre-game Eu euchre-game wherein Bret Harte’s Chinaman, the sly rascal, has fourteen cold decks up his sleeve. Did the great public deride this extravagant departure from the likelihoods? No, the great public didn’t; it suffered no damage, for it doesn’t know the game. Three years ago I emptied into this Autobiography a correspondence which I had been having with a bugler who had bugled in Butterfield’s brigade all through the war. I had published a short story called “A Horse’s Tale,” and in it had introduced several of the regular army’s regular army’s Regular Army’s bugle calls, and had added thereto a call which wasn’t in the regulation-list. My secretary secretary secretary filched it for me out of the opening bars of an opera. That veteran bugler was distressed; he said there was never a bugle in the world that could handle that combination of notes, and he wanted me to snatch it out of the book, for my reputation’s sake, before my ignorant ignorant gro ignorant error should be discovered, and I be laughed at. I explained to him why I believed it not worth while to squelch that call. Last month, in New York, another bugler woke woke woke. up. He came to me with with and with a most earnest appeal to remove that call—on the same old grounds: there never was a bugle that could deliver that combination of notes, and I would be found out, etc., etc. I couldn’t remember just what I had said to the former complainant, but I could come near enough to it to make my point; so I asked— “When did you come across the story?” “Yesterday. And I was going to write you, but I saw by the papers that you were here, so I thought it would be better to come in person.” “How many people are there in the United States?” “Eighty or ninety millions, as I understand it.” “How many men in the army?” “Seventy thousand.” “How many buglers? Seventy thousand?” “Lord, no! Only about—” “Never mind mind mind. about exactnesses. Call it seven hundred.” “It’s too many. There’s only about—” “Never mind, we’ll call it seven hundred. In three years I have heard from two of them. It is one bugler per year and a half. It will take me 469 years to hear from the others—I mean those those sev those that do not die in the meantime. I’m writing a sea-story now. In In The In it the great scene, the central scene, the most thrilling episode, is is it is where the young hero’s foot slips and he falls from the garboard strake to the futtock shrouds and fractures his skull by collision with the maintogallant stunsl boom on the way. How does it strike you? Isn’t it good?” “Good? Well, I should say so! By gracious it sounds just splendid!” “Does it thrill? That’s the main thing—does it thrill?” “Oh, don’t you worry about that! it thrills you from your scalp to your heels.” “Now that is mighty satisfactory, for all all I all I’ve given you is only the naked plunge, nothing more—no embroideries. You wait till I’ve dressed it out with the dramatic accessories—then see! There’s a race on, you know; everybody on deck—crowds of passengers and sailors and officers—and everybody excited; captain on the capstan, thundering orders to the men; the hero’s happy mother and little sister standing in the binnacle, his proud sweetheart standing erect, erect, erect, and statuesque and beautiful in the light of the cat-heads, in the light of the cat-heads, in the light of the cat-heads, her eyes and all eyes riveted upon her daring hero; and at that supreme moment he falls! falls, strikes, and the next moment there he lies gasping in death at the feet of her who loves loves loves, him, adores him, worships him more than life itself! What What How What do you think of it?” “By George, it’s great! I think it’s just splendid!” “To be frank, so do I. Do you understand it? I mean, all of it?” “Well, no, not the ship-talk, but that’s no matter, I get the thrill—I get the whole of it, and my, but it’s just grand!” “All right, then, that’s all I’m after, and I shan’t alter alter altar a word. There are eighty-five millions of people in America that don’t know you can’t fall from the garboard strake, because it’s under the bottom of the ship.” ship.” ship;