2 December 1907 Dictated December December Dec. 2, 1907 Mr. Clemens calls upon Mr. Carnegie, who has just been celebrating his seventieth seventieth 70th birthday—Some characteristics of Mr. Carnegie; his desire to talk about himself, and the attentions shown him. Yesterday I had a message for Andrew Carnegie, who has just been celebrating his seventieth birthday birthday birthday, with the help of friends, and I went up town up town there up town to deliver it, first notifying him by telephone that I should arrive at mid-afternoon mid-afternoon midafternoon , or thereabouts. I arrived at his palace a little after three o’clock and delivered my message; then we adjourned to a room which he called his “cosy corner” “cosy corner” “cozy corner” to have a general chat while I should wait for Mr. Bryce, the British Ambassador Ambassador ambassador , who had gone to fill an appointment, but had left word that I must wait, as he would soon return. I was glad to comply, for I have known Mr. Bryce a good many years, mainly at his own hospitable table in London, and have always not only respected and esteemed him, but have also revered him. I waited an hour, and then had to give it up; but the hour was not ill spent, for Andrew Carnegie, Carnegie, Carnegie, long as I have known him, him, him, has never yet been an uninteresting study, and he was up to standard yesterday. If I were going to describe him in a phrase I think I should call him the Human Being Unconcealed. He is just like the rest of the human race, but with this difference, that the rest of the race try to conceal what they are, and succeed, whereas Andrew tries to conceal what he is, but doesn’t succeed. Yesterday he was at his best; he went on exposing himself all the time, yet he seemed to be unaware of it. I cannot go so far as to say he was unaware of it—seemed is the safer word to use, perhaps. He never has any but one theme—himself. Not that he deals in autobiography; not that he tells you about his brave struggles for a livelihood as a friendless poor boy in a strange land; not that he tells you how he advanced his fortunes steadily and successfully against obstructions that would have defeated almost any other human being similarly placed; not that he tells you how he finally reached the summit of his ambition and became lord over twenty-two twenty-two twenty-two thousand men and possessor of one of the three giant fortunes of his day; no, as regards these achievements he is as modest a man as you could meet anywhere, and seldom makes even a fleeting reference to them; yet it is as I say, he is himself his one darling subject, the only subject he for the moment—the social moment—seems stupendously interested in. I think he in. I think he in., and I think he would surely talk himself to death upon it upon it upon it if you would stay and listen. Then [¶] Then ¶Then in what way does he make himself his subject? In this way. He talks forever and ever and ever and untiringly, of the attentions which have been shown him. Sometimes they have been large attentions, most frequently they are very small ones; but no matter, no attention comes amiss to him, and he likes to revel in them. His friends are coming to observe, with consternation, that while he adds new attentions to his list every now and then, he never drops an old and shop-worn one one attention one out of the catalogue to make room for one of these fresh ones. He keeps the whole list; keeps it complete, and you must take it all, along with the new additions, if there is time, and you survive. It is the deadliest affliction I know of. He is the Ancient Mariner over again; it is not possible to divert him from his subject; in your weariness and despair you try to do it whenever you think you see a chance, but it always fails; he will use your remark for his occasion and make of it a pretext to get straight back upon his subject again. A year or two ago Gilder, of The Century, and I called at Mr. Carnegie’s upon some matter connected with General General Gen. Carl Schurz, who was very ill at the time. We arranged for a visit to the Schurz family with Mr. Carnegie, who was Schurz’s nearest neighbor; then our business was over, and we wanted to get away, but we couldn’t manage it. In the study Mr. Carnegie flew from photograph to photograph, from autograph to autograph, from presentation book to presentation book, and so on, buzzing over each like a happy humming-bird, for each represented a compliment to Mr. Carnegie. Some of these compliments were worth having and worth remembering, but some of them were not; some of them were tokens of honest admiration of the man for the liberal way in which he had devoted millions of dollars to “Carnegie libraries,” “Carnegie libraries,” good causes, “Carnegie libraries, while others were merely merely merely sorrowfully transparent transparent transparent— tokens of reverence for his money-bags; money-bags; money-bags—; but they were all a delight to him, and he loved to talk about them and explain them and enlarge upon them. One was a poem written by a working-man in Scotland. It was a good piece of literary work, and sang Andrew’s glories quite musically. It was in the Scotch dialect, and Andrew read it to us, and read it well—so well that no one born out of Scotland could understand it. Then he told us about King Edward’s visit to him at Skibo Castle in Scotland. We had heard him read the poem before and tell about the King’s King’s king’s visit; we were doomed to hear him read that poem many times and also also also tell about that visit many times, times, times, afterward. When his study seemed to be exhausted we were hoping to get away, but it was not to be. He headed us off at this and that and the other room, and made us enter each and every room under the pretext that there was something important in there for us to consider—but it was always the same old thing: a gold box containing the freedom of the city of London, or Edinburgh, or Jerusalem, or Jericho Jericho Jerico ; or a great photograph with the pictures of all the iron masters whom he had reared and trained and made millionaires of—a picture which they had presented him, along with a banquet; or it was shelves which we must inspect loaded to the guards with applications from everywhere in the world for a Carnegie library; or it was this or that or the other God-knows-what, other God-knows-what, other—God-knows-what—, in the form of some damned attention that had been conferred upon him; and one exasperating feature of it was that it never seemed to occur to him for a moment that these attentions were mainly tributes to his money, and not to himself. himself. himself. [¶] To be continued. Andrew Carnegie—his characteristics, etc. continued. Am I dwelling too long on Carnegie? I think not. He has bought fame and paid cash for it; he has deliberately projected and planned out this fame for himself; he has arranged that his name shall be famous in the mouths of men for centuries to come. He has planned shrewdly, safely, securely, and will have his desire. Any town, or village, or hamlet on the globe can have a public library upon these following unvarying terms: when the applicant shall have raised one-half of the necessary money, Carnegie will furnish the other half, and the library building must permanently bear his name. During the past six or eight years he has been spending six or seven million dollars a year on this scheme. He is still continuing it; there is already a multitude of Carnegie libraries scattered abroad over the planet, and he is always making additions to the list. When he dies, I think it will be found that he has set apart a gigantic fund whose annual interest is to be devoted forever to the begetting of Carnegie libraries. I think that three or four centuries from now, Carnegie libraries will be considerably thicker in the world than churches. It is a long-headed idea, and will deceive many people into thinking Carnegie a long-headed man in other and larger ways. I am sure he is a long-headed man in many and many a wise small way—the way of the trimmer, the way of the smart calculator, the way that enables a man to correctly calculate the tides and come in with the flow and go out with the ebb, keeping a permanent place on the top of the wave of advantage while other men as intelligent as he, but more addicted addicted adicted to principle and less to policy, get stranded on the reefs and bars. It is possible, but not likely, that Carnegie thinks the world regards his library scheme as a large and unselfish benevolence; whereas the world thinks nothing of the kind. The world thanks Mr. Carnegie for his libraries, and is glad to see him spend his millions in that useful way, but it is not deceived as to the motive. It isn’t because the world is intelligent, for the world isn’t; it is only the world’s prejudice against Mr. Carnegie that protects it from being deceived as to the Carnegie motive. The world was deceived as to President Roosevelt’s motive when he issued that lawless Order 78, but that was because the world was saturated with adoration of our small idol. Even half-intelligent half-intelligent half intelligent persons, outside of the holy Republican communion, knew that Order 78 was merely a vote-bribing raid on the Treasury. It would be by no means fair to say that Mr. Carnegie never gives away money with any other object in view than the purchase of fame. He does not give money to any large extent with a non-advertising purpose in view, still there are instances on record—instances where the notice acquired is but momentary, and quickly forgetable and forgotten. To return to the visit of yesterday to Mr. Carnegie in his palace. One of his first remarks was characteristic—characteristic in this way: that it brought forward a new attention which he had been receiving; characteristic, also, in this way: that he dragged it in by the ears, without beating around the bush for a pretext to introduce it. He said, “I have been down to Washington to see the President.” Then he added, with that sort of studied and practised practised practiced casualness which some people assume when they are proposing to state a fact which they are proud of but do not wish to seem proud of, “He sent for me.” I knew he was going to say that. If you let Carnegie tell it, he never seeks the great—the great always seek him. He went on, and told me about the interview. The President had desired his advice regarding the calamitous conditions existing to-day, commercially, in America, and Mr. Carnegie furnished that advice. It was characteristic of Mr. Carnegie that he did not enter into the details of the advice which he furnished, and didn’t try to glorify himself as an adviser. It is curious. He knew, and I knew, and he knew that I knew, that he was thoroughly competent to advise the President, and that the advice furnished would be of the highest value and importance; yet he had no glorifications to waste upon that; he has never a word of brag about his real achievements, his great achievements; they do not seem to interest him in the least degree; he is only interested—and intensely interested—in the flatteries lavished upon him in the disguise of compliments, and in other little vanities which other men would value, but conceal. I must repeat he is an astonishing man in his genuine modesty as regards the large things he has done, and in his juvenile delight in trivialities that feed his vanity. Mr. Carnegie is not any better acquainted with himself than if he had met himself for the first time day before yesterday. He thinks he is a rude, bluff, independent spirit, who writes his mind and thinks his mind with an almost extravagant Fourth of July independence; whereas he is really the counterpart of the rest of the human race in that he does not does not does not boldly speak speak speaks his mind except except except when there isn’t any danger in it. He thinks he is a scorner of kings and emperors and dukes, whereas he is like the rest of the human race: race: race—: a slight attention from one of these can make him drunk for a week, and keep his happy tongue wagging for seven years. I was there an hour or thereabouts, and was about to go, when Mr. Carnegie just happened to remember by pure accident—apparently—something which had escaped his mind—this something which had escaped his mind being, in fact, a something which had not been out of his mind for a moment in the hour, and which he was perishing to tell me about. He jumped up and said, “Oh, wait a moment. I knew there was something I wanted to say. I want to tell you about my meeting with the Emperor.” The German Kaiser, he meant. His remark brought a picture to my mind at once—a picture of Carnegie and the Kaiser; a picture of a battleship and a Brooklyn ferry-boat, so to speak; a picture of a stately big man and a wee little forkèd forkèd forkeèd accent added child of God that Goliath’s wife would have pinned a shirt-waist onto onto onto a clothes-line with—could have done it if she wanted to, anyway. I could see the Kaiser’s frank big face, bold big face, independent big face, as I remember it, and I could see that other face turned up toward it—that foxy, foxy, ratty foxy, white-whiskered, cunning little face, happy, blessed, lit up with a sacred fire, and squeaking, squeaking, saying, squeaking, without words: “Am I in heaven heaven Heaven , or is it only a dream?” I must dwell for a moment upon Carnegie’s stature—if one may call it by that large name—for the sake of the future centuries. The future centuries will be glad to hear about this feature from one who has actually looked upon it, for the matter of stature will always be a matter of interest to the future ages when they are reading about Caesar and Alexander and Napoleon and Carnegie. In truth Mr. Carnegie is no smaller than was Napoleon; he is no smaller than were several other men supremely renowned in history, but for some reason or other he looks smaller than he really is. He looks incredibly small—almost unthinkably small. I do not know how to account for this; I do not know what the reason of it is, and so I have to leave it unexplained; but always when I see Carnegie I am reminded of a Hartford incident of the long, long ago—a thing which had occurred in a law court about a dozen years before I went there, in 1871, to take up my residence. There was a little wee bit of a lawyer there, by the name of Clarke, who was famous for two things: his diminutiveness and his persecuting sharpness in cross-questioning witnesses. It was said that always always always when he got through with a witness there was nothing left of that witness—nothing but a limp and defeated and withered rag. Except once. Just that one time the witness did not wither. The witness was a vast Irishwoman, and she was testifying in her own case. The charge was rape. She said she awoke in the morning and found the accused lying beside her, and she discovered that she had been outraged. The lawyer said, after elaborately measuring her great figure impressively with his eye, “Now Madam what an impossible miracle miracle thing that is that miracle you are hoping to persuade this jury to believe! If one may take so preposterous a thing as that seriously, you might even even even charge it upon me. Come now, suppose you should wake up and find me lying beside you? What would you think?” She measured him critically and at her leisure, with a calm judicious eye, and said, “I’d think I’d had a miscarriage! miscarriage! miscarriage.! period mended to an exclamation point ” Andrew Carnegie, continued. As I was saying, Carnegie jumped up and said he wanted to tell me about his meeting with the Emperor Emperor emperor ; then he went on, something like this: “We went aboard the Hohenzollern Hohenzollern Hohenzollern , Tower and I, in a perfectly informal way, as far as I was concerned, for emperors and commoners are all one to me, and so I didn’t care to have any announcement made that I was coming. Well, there on the deck stood the Emperor Emperor emperor , talking, with the usual imperial crowd of gilded and resplendent naval and civil dignitaries standing a little apart and reverently listening. I stood to one side quietly observing, and thinking my own thoughts, the Emperor Emperor emperor not conscious that I was there. Presently the Ambassador Ambassador ambassador said, “ ‘There “ ‘There “ ‘There is an American here, your Majesty Majesty majesty , whom you have more than once expressed a desire to see.’ “ ‘Who “ ‘Who “ ‘Who is that, your Excellency Excellency excellency ?’ “ ‘Andrew “ ‘Andrew “ ‘Andrew Carnegie.’ “With “With “With a start which might be translated into a ‘God bless my soul,’ the Emperor Emperor emperor said, “ ‘Ha “ ‘Ha “ ‘Ha ! a man I have so wanted to see. Bring him to me. Bring him to me,’ and he advanced half way half way half-way himself and shook me cordially by the hand and said, laughing, ‘Ah, Mr. Carnegie, I know you for a confirmed and incurable independent independent Independent , who thinks no more of kings and emperors than of other people, but I like it in you; I like a man that does his own thinking and speaks out what he thinks, whether the world approve or not; it’s the right spirit, the brave spirit, and there’s little enough of it on this planet.’ “I “I “I said, “ ‘I “ ‘I “ ‘I am glad your Majesty Majesty majesty is willing to take me for what I am. It would not become me to disclaim or disown, or even modify, what your Majesty Majesty majesty has said of me, since it is only the truth. I could not be otherwise than independent if I wanted to, for the spirit of independence is a part of my nature, and a person’s nature is born, not made. But I have reverences, your Majesty Majesty majesty , just the same. What I revere, respect, esteem, and do homage to is a man man man ‘man’ underscored !—a man, a whole man, a fearless man, a fearless man, a fearless man, a manly and masculine and right-feeling and right-acting man; let him be born in garret or palace, it is the same to me—if he is a man he has my homage; your Majesty Majesty majesty is a man, a whole man, a manly man, and it is for this that I revere you, not not not ‘not’ underscored for your mighty place in the world.’ ” world.’ ” world.” And so on, and so on. It was a battle of compliments, appreciations, and almost indecently indecently indecently enthusiastic delight on both sides. One or two of the speeches which Mr. Carnegie made to the Emperor Emperor emperor were of the soaring, high-voiced, ornate, and thunderously oratorical sort, and in re-delivering them now he acted them out with fire, energy, and effective gesticulation. It was a fine and stirring thing to see. Andrew Carnegie continued—Some of the advice which he gives to Roosevelt when he visits him—by request—in Washington. We are all alike—on the inside. Also we are exteriorly all alike, if you leave out Carnegie. Scoffing democrats democrats Democrats as we are, we do dearly love to be noticed by a duke, and when we are noticed by a monarch we have softening of the brain for the rest of our lives. We try our best to keep from referring to these precious collisions, and in time some of us succeed in keeping our dukes and monarchs to ourselves; it costs us something to do this, but in time we accomplish it. In my own case, I have so carefully and persistently trained myself in this kind of self-denial that to-day I can look on calm and unmoved when a returned American is casually and gratefully playing the earls he has met; I can look on, silent and unexcited, and never offer to call his hand, although I have three kings and a pair of emperors up my sleeve. It takes a long time to reach this summit of self-sacrifice, and Carnegie has not reached it and never will. He loves to talk about his encounters with sovereigns and aristocracies; loves to talk of these splendid artificialities in a lightly scoffing and compassionate vein and try not not not to let on that those encounters are the most precious bric-à-brac bric-à-brac bric-aà-brac accent added in the treasury of his memory; but he is just a human being, and he can’t even wholly deceive himself, let alone the housecat housecat house cat . With all his gentle scoffings, Carnegie’s delight in his contacts with the great amounts to a mania; it must be as much as four years since King Edward visited him at Skibo Castle, yet it is an even bet that not a day has passed since then that he has not told somebody all about it, and enlarged with pride upon the fact that the visit was so small a matter to him that he was able to forget that it was impending, and so the King had to wait a moment until Mr. Carnegie was sent for. Mr. Carnegie cannot leave the King’s visit alone; he has told me about it at least four times, in detail. When he applied that torture the second, third, and fourth times, he certainly knew that it was the second, third, and fourth time, for he has an excellent memory. I am not able to believe that he ever allows an opportunity to tell it to go by without getting out of that opportunity all it is worth. He has likable qualities and I like him, but I don’t believe I can stand the King Edward visit again. In his talk about his recent visit—by request—to the President, Mr. Carnegie very, very gently criticised criticised criticized a couple of Mr. Roosevelt’s latest insanities: one of these is his departure from his last year’s requirement of a new battleship battleship battle-ship per year and his substituted policy of last week, requiring four new battleships battleships battle-ships right away, at a cost of sixty-nine million dollars. Carnegie suggested to him, in a a a guarded and diplomatic way, that this amazing warlike outburst was not altogether in harmony with Mr. Roosevelt’s laboriously acquired position in the world as the Dove of Peace, and as the recipient of the Nobel Prize of forty thousand dollars as the chiefest Dove of Peace Dove of Peace dove of peace on the planet. Mr. Carnegie also suggested, in cautious, diplomatic language, that the war-ships be postponed, and the sixty-nine millions be employed in improving the waterways of the country. I said that the suggestion to drop the battleships battleships battle-ships was good advice, but that the President would not be influenced by it, because dropping the battleships battleships battle-ships would interfere with his policy—policy, not policies, since the President has only one policy, policy, policy—, and that is to do insanely spectacular things and get himself talked about. Mr. Carnegie toyed cautiously with that suggestion of insanity; he did not commit himself, and I didn’t expect him to do it. He had no call to trade dangerous political confessions with me—and besides, he didn’t need to tell me what I already knew; to wit, that there isn’t an intelligent human being in America that doesn’t privately believe that the President is substantially and to all effects and purposes insane, and ought to be in an asylum. I added, without fishing for a response, and not expecting one, “Mr. Roosevelt is the Tom Sawyer of the political world of the twentieth century; always showing off; always hunting for a chance to show off; in his frenzied imagination the Great Republic is a vast Barnum circus with him for a clown and the whole world for audience; he would go to Halifax for half a chance to show off, and he would go to hell hell Hell for a whole one.” Mr. Carnegie chuckled half approvingly, but didn’t say anything, and I wasn’t expecting him to say anything. As I have said, Mr. Carnegie mentioned two incidents of his Washington visit: one of them was the one I have been talking about—the four battleships battleships battle-ships ; the other was the “In God We Trust.” Away back yonder in the days of the Civil War, a strong effort was made to introduce the name of God into the Constitution; it failed, but a compromise was arrived at which partially satisfied the friends of the Deity. God was left out of the Constitution, but was furnished a front seat on the coins of the country. After that, on one side of the coin we had an Injun, or a Goddess of Liberty, Liberty, Liberty, , from the cigar-shop, or something of that kind, and on the other side we engraved the legend, “In God We Trust.” Now then, after that legend had remained there forty years or so, unchallenged and doing no harm to anybody, the President suddenly “threw a fit” the other day, as the popular expression goes, and ordered that remark to be removed from our coinage. Mr. Carnegie granted that the matter was not of consequence; that a coin had just exactly the same value without the legend as with it, and he said he had no fault to find with Mr. Roosevelt’s action, but only with his expressed reasons for the act. The President had ordered the suppression of that motto because a coin carried the name of God into improper places, and that this was a profanation of the Holy Name. Carnegie said the name of God is used to being carried into improper places everywhere and all the time, and that he thought the President’s reasoning rather weak and poor. I thought the same, and said, “But that is just like the President. If you will notice, he is very much in the habit of furnishing a poor reason for his acts while there is an excellent reason staring him in the face, which he overlooks. There was a good reason for removing that motto; there was, indeed, an unassailably good reason—in the fact that the motto stated a lie. If this nation has ever trusted in God, that time has gone by; for nearly half a century almost its entire trust has been in the Republican party and the dollar—mainly the dollar. I recognize that I am only making an assertion, and furnishing no proof; I am sorry, but this is a habit of mine; sorry also that I am not alone in it; everybody seems to have this disease. Take an instance: the removal of the motto fetched out a clamor from the pulpit; little groups and small conventions of clergymen gathered themselves together all over the country, and one of these little groups, consisting of twenty-two ministers, put up a prodigious assertion unbacked by any quoted statistics, and passed it unanimously in the form of a resolution: the assertion, to wit, that this is a Christian country. Why, Carnegie, so is hell hell Hell . Those clergymen know that inasmuch as ‘Strait Strait Straight is the way and narrow is the gate, and few—few few few ‘few’ underscored —are they that enter in thereat’ has had the natural effect of making hell hell Hell the only really prominent Christian community in any of the worlds; but we don’t brag of this, and certainly it is not proper to brag and boast that America is a Christian country when we all know that certainly five-sixths of our population could not enter in at the narrow gate.” Mr. Carnegie did not argue the point, and I did not expect him to do it, for he couldn’t know what use what use was what uses I might make of unwise disclosures in case he should indulge himself in that kind of revelations.